# Page 1

1.   Introduction  While disastrous tsunamis are mostly generated by large earthquakes, some tsunamis are excited by pres- sure disturbances at sea surfaces caused by meteorological phenomena such as storms and moving convec- tive systems (e.g., Churchill et al., 1995; Monserrat et al., 2006). Such tsunamis are known as meteorological tsunamis or meteotsunamis. The basic generation mechanism of a meteorological tsunami was theoret- ically investigated in two-dimensional (2-D) space with long-wave approximations (e.g., An et al., 2012; Greenspan, 1956; Proudman, 1929; Seo & Liu, 2014). These studies predicted that the sea-surface pressure change moving at nearly the same speed as the tsunami speed efficiently amplifies the tsunami height. This amplification is often called the Proudman effect. Meteorological tsunamis have been observed in different regions in the world (e.g., Rabinovich et al., 2020; Šepić et al., 2015). Numerous studies analyzed the records using tsunami simulations and reproducing the Proudman effect. For example, Hibiya and Kajiura (1982) analyzed tide gauge records of meteorological tsunamis observed in Nagasaki Bay, Japan. They numerically  Abstract   Although most tsunamis are generated by the sea-bottom deformation caused by earthquakes, some tsunamis are excited by sea-surface pressure changes. This study theoretically investigated tsunamis generated by sea-surface pressure changes and derived the solutions in three- dimensional (3-D) space, whereas most past studies employed two-dimensional equations. Using the solutions, we simulated and visualized tsunami generation by a growing pressure change. Negative pressure change made the sea surface uplifted inside the source region and negative leading waves were radiated from the source region. We also simulated the tsunami generation when the pressure change at the sea surface moves at almost the same speed as the tsunami propagation speed. The tsunami height increased with increasing travel distance, including the dispersion effects. The 3-D solutions in this study, including vertical velocity distribution, indicate that both tsunami height and sea-surface pressure changes contribute to ocean-bottom pressure changes, suggesting the difficulty in measuring tsunami height with ocean-bottom pressure observations. When the pressure change source was characterized by short-wavelength components, the dispersion sometimes possibly increased the tsunami height more extensively than the nondispersive tsunamis. The 3-D solutions are necessary for describing tsunami generation where the long-wave approximations are not applicable in open oceans.  Plain Language Summary   Although most tsunamis are generated by giant earthquakes, some tsunamis are excited by meteorological phenomena such as storms and moving convective system. These are known as meteorological tsunamis or meteotsunamis. Most studies employ two-dimensional equations for modeling meteorological tsunamis. This is mainly because past studies used coastal records that cannot directly observe tsunami generation. However, recent tsunami sensors have enabled us to capture the tsunamis in open oceans and we expect that they can help us directly observe their generation. In order to fully investigate the generation process including vertical water flow, the theory needs to be formulated in three-dimensional (3-D) space. This study theoretically formulates meteorological tsunamis in 3-D space. We derive new solutions that can theoretically visualize tsunami generation and growth processes. The solutions also predict the pressure changes at the sea bottom during the generation process, which are observable by recent tsunami observation networks.  SAITO ET AL. © 2021. The Authors. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.  Meteorological Tsunami Generation Due to Sea-Surface Pressure Change: Three-Dimensional Theory and Synthetics of Ocean-Bottom Pressure Change Tatsuhiko Saito   1   , Tatsuya Kubota   1   , Naotaka Y. Chikasada 1   , Yuusuke Tanaka   2 , and Osamu Sandanbata 1  1 National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Resilience, Tsukuba, Japan,   2 Japan Agency for Marine- Earth Science and Technology, Yokohama, Japan  Key Points:  •   Three-dimensional solutions describing tsunami generation due to sea-surface pressure change are derived •   The solutions can simulate ocean- bottom pressure changes during the generation that are detectable by recent open-ocean array observations •   Short-wavelength dispersive tsunamis can be enlarged more by a moving pressure change source, compared with long-wavelength tsunamis  Correspondence to:  T. Saito, saito-ta@bosai.go.jp  Citation:  Saito, T., Kubota, T., Chikasada, N. Y., Tanaka, Y., & Sandanbata, O. (2021). Meteorological tsunami generation due to sea-surface pressure change: Three- dimensional theory and synthetics of ocean-bottom pressure change.   Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans ,  126 , e2020JC017011. https://doi. org/10.1029/2020JC017011 Received 23 NOV 2020 Accepted 13 APR 2021 10.1029/2020JC017011  RESEARCH ARTICLE  1 of 29

# Page 2

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  simulated records by setting a moving pressure change at the sea surface as a force in long-wave equations. Using detailed distributions of meteor- ological data such as atmospheric pressure distributions and wind speed distributions, researchers have investigated the sources of meteorological tsunamis (e.g., Heidarzadeh et al., 2020; Williams et al., 2019). Those analyzed tsunami records were mostly observed near coasts with eyewitnesses, video captures, and tide gauge records (e.g., Heidarzadeh et al., 2020). Tide gauge records have played an important role in quan- titative analyses for the estimation of the tsunami source kinematics or excitation. However, since tide gauges are installed inside bays and har- bors, the records are considerably contaminated by strong coastal site effects, which prevents us from extracting the details of the generation process. Besides, because the tide gauges are located in very shallow sea and the sampling rate is too low to resolve short-period tsunamis, they hardly capture tsunami dispersion (e.g., Kubota, Saito, & Suzuki, 2020). Therefore, most past studies used 2-D nondispersive tsunami equations for the analyses of the observed data. Tsunami observations have exhibited impressive growth in past decades due to the development of ocean-bottom pressure gauges, which enabled us to observe tsunamis outside bays and harbors (e.g., Aoi et al., 2020; Bernard & Meinig, 2011; Kanazawa et al., 2016; Kaneda et al., 2015; Kawaguchi et al., 2015; Mungov et al., 2013; Rabinovich & Eblé, 2015; Tsushima & Ohta 2014). Unlike coastal tide gauges, deep- ocean observations can capture clear tsunami signals (e.g., Grilli et al., 2013; Inazu & Saito, 2014; Kubota, Saito, Chikasada, & Suzuki, 2020; Sandanbata et al., 2018). The high-quality records in open oceans have driven studies about dispersion and high-resolution tsunami source estimations (e.g., Baba et al. 2015; Kirby et al., 2013; Saito & Kubota, 2020). Moreover, ocean-bottom pressure gauges can catch tsunamis inside the generation field (e.g., Mikada et al., 2006; Mizutani et al., 2020; Nosov et al., 2007). This drastically changed tsunami research because the generation cannot be described by 2-D equations that were often used in past tsunami studies. Three-dimensional (3-D) fluid theories play a fundamental role in the generation process (Lotto & Dunham, 2015; Lotto et al., 2017; Maeda et al., 2013; Takahashi 1942). Saito (2013) investigated the 3-D tsunami generation due to sea-bottom deformation, providing a theoretical basis for the initial tsu- nami height distribution for the 2-D tsunami simulations. The study also works as the basis for a unified simulation method for seismic and tsunami waves (Saito, 2019; Saito & Tsushima, 2016; Saito et al., 2019). However, at present, it seems that 3-D studies have not been done for meteorological tsunamis yet. This study theoretically describes the tsunamis generated by sea-surface pressure changes in an incom- pressible sea. Particularly, we investigate the ocean-bottom pressure changes during tsunami generation considering 3-D fluid motions. Besides, the formulation can include short-wavelength tsunamis exhibiting the dispersion. Section 2 describes a 3-D theory of tsunami generation. Section 3 visualizes and investigates tsunami generation due to sea-surface pressure changes based on the solutions. Considering a growing surface pressure change that is not moving, we simulate the tsunamis to clarify the excitation mechanism. We then simulate the tsunamis generated by a moving surface-pressure change source. We also study the dispersion in meteorological tsunamis. Finally, Section 4 concludes this study.  2.   Tsunami Generation in Incompressible Sea 2.1.   Fundamental Equations  The Cartesian coordinate system (Figure 1) is used for the formulation, where the   x   and   y   axes are in the horizontal plane and the   z -axis is taken positive downward. The sea surface at rest is located at    0 z   . We assume a constant sea depth located at    0 z   h   . We consider that a particle, located at        x   y   z x   y   z x   e   e   e   at time    0 t   ( i e   is the basis vector for the   i   axis),   is   displaced   to               ,   ,   ,   ,   ,   , x y z t   x y z t r   x   u   at   time   t ,   where   the   displacement   vector              ,   , ,   x   x   y   y   z   z x y z t   u   u   u u   e   e   e  describes the motion in the medium (e.g., Dahlen & Tromp, 1998). This SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  2 of 29  Figure 1.   Coordinates used in the formulation. 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 3

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  description is different from those like   v ( r , t ) where the attention is not focused on each particle motion labeled by   x   but on each point fixed in space   r   (e.g., Gill, 1982; Pedlosky 2003). When neglecting the change of the gravity potential due to the motion and assuming small displacements, the 3-D linear momentum equation is given by                                                  2 0   0   0 2 ,   , ,   ,   , ,   z   z  x y z t   x y z t   g   u t  u   τ   u e  (1) (e.g., Equation 3.57 in Dahlen & Tromp, 1998; Equation 9.26 in Segall, 2010), where   τ   is the stress change caused by the motion,   ρ 0   is the density, and   g 0   is the gravitational acceleration. There is no shear stress in the fluid and the stress tensor is described as             ,   ,   ,   ,   , , x y z t   p x y z t τ   I  (2) where   p   is the pressure change caused by the motion and   I   is the identity matrix. We assume no dilatation of the water medium:        0. u  (3) At the sea bottom, we set no vertical displacement:        0 ,   ,   ,   0 z u   x y h   t  (4) At the sea surface, we give the pressure change as              surface ,   , 0,   ,   ,   . p x y   t   p   x y t  (5) The Equations 1–5 describe the fluid motion. In particular, this study considers the sea-surface pressure change Equation 5 as the source. We will find the solutions   u ( x ,   y ,   z ,   t ) and   p ( x ,   y ,   z ,   t ). Using   u z ( x ,   y ,   z ,   t ), we derive the tsunami height                ,   ,   ,   , 0, z x y t   u   x y   t   .  2.2.   Wavenumber Integration Method  To find the solutions   u ( x ,   y ,   z ,   t ) and   p ( x ,   y ,   z ,   t ) that satisfy Equations 1–5, we use the wavenumber integra- tion method. The displacements and the pressure change are represented as integrals with respect to the wavenumber and the angular frequency:                                                2 1   1 ,   , ,   ,   , , 2   2  i k   x   k   y x   y i   t x   y   z   x   y p x y z t   d   e   dk dk kT   k   k   z   e ∬  (6)                                                    2 1   1 ,   , ,   ,   , ,   , 2   2  i k   x   k   y j   x   y i   t j   x   y   r   x   y ik u   x y z t   d   e   dk dk   U   k   k   z   e   j   x y k  ∬  (7)                                             2 1   1 ,   , ,   ,   , , 2   2  i k   x   k   y x   y i   t z   x   y   z   x   y u   x y z t   d   e   dk dk U   k   k   z   e ∬  (8) where     2   2  x   y k   k   k   . By substituting Equations 6, 7 and 8 with the condition of no dilatation (Equation 3), we obtain                  0  z r dU   z kU   z   dz  (9) SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  3 of 29 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 4

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  For brevity, we shall write   U r ( z ) instead of   U r ( k x ,   k y ,   z ,   ω ) and so on. From the momentum equation (Equa- tion 1) with Equation 9, we obtain the ordinal differential equations with respect to the independent vari- able   z :                                                                                                        2   3 0 2   2 0 2   2   2 0   0   0   0 2   2 .  z   z z   z  g k   k U   z   U   z d T   z   T   z dz   g k   g k k  (10) By evaluating the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the 2 × 2 matrix in Equation 10, we can calculate the propagator matrix   A ( z ) (e.g., Aki & Richards, 2002; Gilbert & Backus, 1966):                                                                                                                                                                                      2 0 2   2 11   12   0 2   2   2 21   22   0   0   0 2   4   2 cosh   sinh   sinh . 1   sinh   cosh   sinh  g k   k kz   kz   kz A   z   A   z z   A   z   A   z   g k   g k kz   kz   kz k  A  (11) This propagator matrix relates the   U z   and   T z   at different depths   z   and   z 0   as                                                                    0 0 0 .  z   z z   z  U   z   U   z z   z T   z   T   z  A  (12) The vertical displacement is zero at the bottom (Equation 4) or        0   0 z U   h   . Equation 12 gives                                                                   0 0 0 0 0  z z z U   h   T   h T   A  (13) resulting in                      0 22   0 1   0 . z   z T   h   T A   h  (14) Thus, we can represent   U z ( z ),   T z ( z ) at any depth with the surface pressure   T z (0) as                                                                 0 0 0   .  z z z U   z   z   h   T   h T   z   A  (15) that is,                          12   0 22   0 0 z   z  A   z   h U   z   T A   h  (16) and                            22   0 22   0 0 . z   z  A   z   h T   z   T A   h  (17)  2.3.   Sudden Pressure Change at the Sea Surface  We here consider a special case in which a pressure change   p 0 ( x ,   y ) suddenly occurs at the time    0 t   . The surface pressure change     surface   ,   , p   x y t   is represented as SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  4 of 29 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 5

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans                                                            surface   0   0 2 1   1   1 ,   ,   ,   , 2   ˆ 2  i k   x   k   y x   y i   t x   y   x   y p   x y t   p   x y H t   d   e   dk dk p   k   k   e i  ∬  (18) where   H ( t ) is the step function        1 H t   when   0 t   and        0 H t   when   0 t   . A comparison of Equa- tion 18 with Equation 6 gives the boundary condition at the surface       ,   , 0, z   x   y T   k   k   as                0 0   . ˆ   ,   1 x   y z p   k   k T   k   i  (19) With the propagator matrix (Equation 11) and the boundary condition (Equation 19), Equation 16 is cal- culated as U   z   A   z   h A   h   T k   k h   z kh z   z                                    12   0 22   0 2 0 2   0 0 0      sinh cosh                                      kg   kh p   k   k k   i k h   z kh x   y  0 2   0 0 0 0 1     sinh , sinh cosh                       k p   k   k g k   kh   i x   y   0 0   2 0   0 1   1 , tanh        (20) Equations 20 and (9) give                                                 0 0 2 0 0   0   0 , cosh 1   1   1 cosh   ta h ˆ n  x   y z r kp   k   k k h   z dU U   z   k   dz   i kh   g k   kh  (21) The   z T   z   is then given by T   z   A   z   h A   h   T i k h   z kh   i z   z                                            22   0 22   0 0 0 0 1     cosh cosh      g k   k h   z kh   g k   kh p   k   x 0   0 0   2 0   0 0 1 sinh cosh   tanh                                      , ,   .  k k y      (22) In particular, for the sea bottom (    0 z   h   ), we obtain                                              0 0   2 22   0   0   0   0 , 1   1   1 0   . cosh   t nh ˆ a  x   y z   z p   k   k T   h   T   k   i A   h   kh   g k   kh  (23)  2.4.   Integration with Respect to the Angular Frequency  With Equation 8, the vertical displacement is represented as                                  0 0 2   0 0 2 0   0 , sinh 1 ,   , ,   cosh 2 1   1   1 2   tanh  x   y i k   x   k   y x   y z   x   y i   t k p   k   k k h   z u   x y z t   dk dk e   kh d   e   i g k   kh                                       (24) The integration with respect to the angular frequency   ω   is conducted with the residue theorem (Appen- dix A). We calculate Equation 24 as SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  5 of 29 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 6

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans                                                                                                                                            2   0 0 0 2   2 0   0   0 0   0 0 2   0   0   0 , sinh 1   1 ,   ,   ,   1   cos cosh 2 ,   sinh 1   1   cos   . ˆ si h 2 ˆ n  x   y i k   x   k   y x   y z   x   y x   y i k   x   k   y x   y x   y p   k   k k h   z k u   x y z t   dk dk e   t   H t k kh p   k   k   k h   z dk dk e   t   H t g   kh  ∬ ∬  (25) where          0   0   0 tanh   . g k   kh  (26) Equation 26 represents the dispersion relation. Similarly, we obtain u   x y z t   dk dk e   g ik k k h j   x   y i k x  x   k y  y   j  ,   , ,   cosh                             1 2 1 2   0   0 0     z z kh   p   k   k t   H t   j   x y x   y                                               sinh   , cos   ,   , 0 0 0 1      (27) and p x y z t dk dk e   p   k   k   k h   z x   y i k x  x   k y  y x   y  ,   , , ,   cosh                              1 2   2   0 0                                                       cosh   cos   sinh sin   cos  kh   t   k h   z kh   t  0 0 0 0 0 1                                       H t dk dk e   p   k   k   k h x   y i k x  x   k y  y x   y  1 2   2   0         ,   sinh   0 0 0   0 0 2 2                                       z kh kz kh   t   H t  sinh sinh sinh   cos   .    (28) Particularly at the sea bottom, the pressure change is given by                                             0   0   0 2   0 1   1 ,   ,   ,   ,   cos   . cosh   ˆ 2  i k   x   k   y x   y x   y   x   y p x y h   t   dk dk e   p   k   k   t H t kh  ∬  (29) We introduce tsunami height   η ( x ,   y ,   t ). This is given by the vertically upward displacement at the sea surface                ,   ,   ,   , 0, z x y t   u   x y   t  :                                                                   0   0 2   0   0 1   1 ,   ,   ,   , 0,   ,   1   cos   . ˆ 2  i k   x   k   y x   y z   x   y   x   y x y t   u   x y   t   dk dk e   p   k   k   t   H t g  ∬  (30)  2.5.   Green's Functions  Using the solutions 25–30, we then derive the solution with respect to the impulsive pressure change at the sea surface given by                    ,   , 0,   ,   . p x y   t   x y   t  (31) By differentiating the solutions 25–30 with respect to time and replacing     0 ˆ   , x   y p   k   k   as        0   ,   1 ˆ   x   y p   k   k   , we calculate the wavefield solutions in the case where the surface pressure source is given by Equation 31. For example, the vertical displacement excited by the source of Equation 31 is calculated from Equation 25 as                                                            0 0   0 2   0   0   0 sinh 1   1 ,   , ,   sin   . sinh 2  i k   x   k   y x   y z   x   y k h   z u   x y z t   dk dk e   t H t g   kh  ∬  (32) SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  6 of 29 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 7

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  Here, we attach a bar on the left-hand side variables as z u   rather than   u   z   because this impulse response or the Green's function has a dimension that is different from   u   z . The corresponding tsunami height is given by                                                     0   0 2   0   0 1   1 ,   ,   ,   , 0,   sin   . 2  i k   x   k   y x   y z   x   y x y t   u   x y   t   dk dk e   t H t g  ∬  (33) By differentiating Equation 32 with respect to time, we obtain the vertical velocity as                                                            0   2 0   0 2   0   0   0 sinh 1   1 ,   , ,   cos   . sinh 2  i k   x   k   y x   y z   x   y k h   z v   x y z t   dk dk e   t H t g   kh  ∬  (34) Similarly, we obtain the horizontal velocity components:                                        0   2 0   0 2   0   0   0 cosh 1 ,   , ,   cos sinh 2 ,  i k   x   k   y   j x   y j   x   y k h   z ik v   x y z t   dk dk e   t H t g k   kh j   x y                            ∬  (35) The pressure change in the fluid is                                                      0   0 2 0 0   0 2 sinh 1 ,   , ,   sin sinh 2 sinh   2 sinh sinh   sinh 2  i k   x   k   y x   y x   y kz p x y z t   dk dk e   t H t kh k h   z   kz   t kh   kh                                                     ∬  (36) In particular, for the sea bottom,                                                            0   0   0 2   0 1   1 ,   ,   ,   sin cosh 2  i k   x   k   y x   y x   y p x y h   t   dk dk e   t   t H t kh  ∬  (37) Equations 32–37 are the most important and fundamental solutions in our formulation because we can obtain any responses with respect to any surface pressure change            surface   ,   , x   y p   with convolution opera- tions. For example, the vertical displacement response is given for an arbitrary sea-surface pressure change source            surface   ,   , x   y p   as                                                             surface ,   , ,   ,   , ,   ,   ,   . z   x   y   z   x   y   x   y u   x y z t   d   d   d u   x   y   z t   p ∬  (38)  3.   Visualization and Interpretations 3.1.   Surface Pressure Change at a Fixed Location  As the simplest case, we consider the surface pressure change as not moving. The pressure change starts at    0 t  and increases linearly with duration   T . The sea-surface pressure source is represented as                  0 ,   , 0,   ,   . p x y   t   p   x y   f   t  (39) The temporal change is assigned to be a ramp function of duration   T , starting at    0 t   :                     for   . 1   for  t  H t   t   T f   t   T T   t  (40) SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  7 of 29 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 8

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  The spatial distribution is assumed to be Gaussian, with a scale length   a   in the   x   direction and infinitely long in the   y   direction:          2 2 0   0 ,   .  x a p   x y   P e  (41) The 2-D Fourier transform of Equation 41 is given by                                                                 2 2 0   0   0   1 ˆ   ,   ,   2   ˆ 2  x i k   x   k   y x   y   ik   x a   x x   y   y   y   x p   k   k   p   x y e   dxdy   k   P e   e   dx   k   p   k ∬  (42) where we set                      2   2 2 2   4 1   0   0 ˆ   .  x   a   k x ik   x a   x x p   k   P e   e   dx   aP e  (43) Using the impulse responses of Equations 32–37 and the pressure change as source 39–41 in the convolu- tion (see, for example, Equation 38), we obtain the sea-surface height change                                                                                                         0   0 1   0 0   0   0   0   0 0 1   sin   0 1 ,   ,   1 2   sin   si ˆ n  x ik   x x x t   t   t   T p   k   T x y t   dk e   g   T   t   t   T   T   t T  (44) the velocity fields                                                                                                                     0 0   1 0   0 0   0   0 1   1   cos   0 sinh 1 ,   , ,   1 2   sinh   co ˆ s   cos  x   x ik   x x z   x x t   t   T k   h   z   p   k   T v   x y z t   dk e   g k   h   t   T   t   T   t T  (45)                                                                                                                      0 0   1 0   0 0   0   0 1   1   cos   0 cosh 1 ,   , ,   1 2   sinh   cos   cos ˆ x   x   x ik   x x x   x x x t   t   T k   h   z   ik p   k   T v   x y z t   dk e   g   k k   h   t   T   t   T   t T  (46) and the ocean-bottom pressure change                                                                                           0 1   0 0 0   0   0 0 1   sin   0 1 ,   ,   ,   1 2   cosh   sin   sin ˆ   x ik   x x x x t   t   T p   k   T p x y z   h   t   dk e   k   h   t   t   T   T   t T  (47) Using these solutions with the depth  0   4 h   km and setting   P 0   = −1 mH   2 O (    9.8   kPa),   a   = 20 km, and  T   = 30 s as a source (Equations 39–41), we numerically calculate and visualize the tsunami generation and propagation for negative sea-surface pressure change in Figure 2. Figures 2a and 2b show that the sea-surface pressure, which we set as a source, decreases with time until  t   T  (= 30 s). During this period, the sea-surface height and the velocity in the sea layer change slightly and do not show significant variations (the second and third panels in Figures 2a and 2b). As the time elapses (60–120 s, Figures 2c and 2d), the sea-surface height gradually increases. At the time of 250 s (Figure 2e), the sea-surface uplift reached 1.0 m. While the sea-surface height is uplifted inside the SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  8 of 29 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 9

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  9 of 29  Figure 2.   Tsunami generation due to a nonmoving surface pressure change for various elapsed times: (a)   t   = 4, (b) 30, (c) 60, (d) 120, (e) 250, and (f) 500 s. Top panels show the pressure change at the surface where the peak pressure change is   P 0   = −1 mH 2 O (   9.8   kPa), the duration is    30 T   s and the spatial scale is given by    20 a   km in Equation 42 and 43. Second panels show tsunami height or vertical upward displacement at the sea surface. Third panels show velocity distribution  2   2  x   z v   v   in the sea layer with the depth   h 0   = 4 km. Bottom panels show the pressure change at the sea bottom. 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 10

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  pressure source, the surface height is subsided outside the pressure source ( x   <   ∼ –30 km and   x   >   ∼ 30 km in the second panels in Figures 2d and 2e) so as to satisfy the water volume conservation. The water volume is displaced horizontally. The displacement propagates as tsunamis. We consider the characteristic length of the sea-surface pressure change as   L   c . For example, we may roughly consider 2 a   in Equation 41 as   L c . The characteristic wavenumber is then     2   / c   c k   L   . We perform a dimen- sional analysis using Equation 44 for the early elapsed time  t   T   considering     0   c ck   where   c   is the phase velocity:                                                                                                                                                                                    0 0   0 0 0   0 2   3 0 0   0 ,   1 ,   ,   sin   sin ,   1   2 cos   sin   2 ,   1 1   cos   1   O 6   2   2  c   c   c c c c   c c c   c c p   x y x y t   ck T   ck t   ck   t   T g   ck T p   x y   ck T ck T   ck t g   ck T p   x y   ck T   ck T ck t g  (48) When the source duration is short, Equation 48 is approximated to                                          0 0   0 , ,   ,   1   cos   when   . c c   c p   x y   L x y t   ck t   T   T g   c  (49) Equation 49 indicates that the tsunami height   η ( x ,   y ,   t ) develops with time   t   irrespective of the source du- ration   T   when   T   is much shorter than the characteristic time given by    / c   c T   L   c   . This characteristic time  T c   is a time scale for a tsunami propagating the distance of the source size or roughly corresponding to the time when the sea-surface height inside the source reaches equilibrium (Figure 2e). In Figure 2, we set the source duration as   T   = 30 s, smaller than the characteristic time  c T   200 s. If we set the duration   T  longer than the characteristic time   T c , the amplitude of the leading tsunamis becomes smaller (e.g., Saito & Furumura, 2009). The bottom pressure change (the bottom panels in Figure 2) increases with time in Figures 2c–2e. The increasing sea-surface height makes the pressure change at the sea bottom less. As more time elapses (Fig- ure 2f), the sea surface remains uplifted (top second panel in Figure 2f) to compensate the surface-pressure source, and the horizontally displaced water volume propagates as a tsunami ( x   <   ∼ –30 km and   x   >   ∼ 30 km in the top second panel in Figure 2f). The propagating tsunamis are detectable as ocean-bottom pressure changes.  3.2.   A Comparison with the Tsunamis Generated by an Earthquake  The surface pressure change                  0 ,   , 0,   , p x y   t   p   x y H t   generates tsunamis that are identical to the tsuna- mis generated by the initial height distribution         ,   ,   0 x y t   given by                     0 0   0 , ,   ,   0   .  p   x y x y t   g  (50) In other words, here,        ,   , 0 x y   is the equivalent initial tsunami height for the pressure change source         0   , p   x y H t  . The 3-D formulation in this study derives this equivalence between the sea-surface pressure change source and the initial height distribution source only for the tsunamis outside the source region. From Equation 30, we represent the tsunamis caused by the surface pressure change as two terms: SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  10 of 29 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 11

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans                                                  0 2   2 0   0 0   0 0   0 1   1   1 ,   ,   , 2   2 1   ,   cos   .  i k   x   k   y   i k   x   k   y x   y   x   y x   y   x   y   x   y x   y x y t   dk dk e   p   k   k   H t   dk dk e g p   k   k   t H t g                          ∬   ∬  (51) Note that the first term contributes to tsunamis only inside the surface pressure change but does not contrib- ute to tsunamis outside the surface pressure change (i.e., the area where        0   ,   0 p   x y   ) since it does not propa- gate. On the other hand, the second term contributes to the tsunamis outside the pressure change since it does propagate as waves due to the factor of      0 cos   t   . As a result, the tsunami outside the source region is given by                                           surface outside   0   0 2   0   0 1   1 ,   ,   ,   cos 2  i k   x   k   y x   y x   y   x   y x y t   dk dk e   p   k   k   t H t g  ∬  (52) For the tsunamis caused by sea-bottom deformation (see Appendix B), the tsunami height        bottom   ,   , x y t   is given by                                                                                0 bottom 0 2   0 0   0 2 , 1 ,   ,   cos cosh 2 1   ,   cos 2 ˆ ˆ  x   y i k   x   k   y x   y x   y i k   x   k   y x   y x   y   x   y u   k   k x y t   dk dk e   t H t kh dk dk e   k   k   t H t  ∬ ∬  (53) where     0 ˆ   , x   y u   k   k   and      0 ˆ   , x   y k   k   are the 2-D spatial Fourier transform of the sea-bottom vertical displace- ment     0   , u   x y   and the corresponding initial tsunami height distribution      0   , x y   , respectively. Using Equa- tions 52 and 53, we confirmed that              surface   bottom  outside   ,   ,   ,   , x y t   x y t   if we set                                           0   0   0 0   0 0   0   0   0   0 ,   ,   ,  ,   or   ,   . ˆ   ˆ ˆ   cosh  x   y   x   y x   y u   k   k   p   k   k   p   x y k   k   x y kh   g   g  (54) However, we should note that this situation differs for the wavefields inside the source regions. For example, the pressure change at the sea bottom caused by the sea-bottom vertical displacement distribution     0   , u   x y  is given by Equation B14 in Appendix B as                                                            bottom 0   0   0   0 2 0 2 0 0 0   0   0   0   0 0 1 ,   ,   ,   ,   cos 2 cosh tanh   ,   ,   . ˆ ˆ  i k   x   k   y x   y x   y   x   y x   y p   x y h   t   dk dk e   g u   k   k   t H t kh kh h   u   k   k   t   g u   x y H t kh                                          ∬  (55) On the other hand, the pressure change caused by the corresponding surface-pressure change source is given by Equations 29 and 54 as                                                                0   0 2   0 0   0   0 0 2   2 0 1   1 ,   ,   ,   ,   cos cosh 2 , 1   cos 2   cos ˆ ˆ h  i k   x   k   y x   y x   y   x   y x   y i k   x   k   y x   y x   y p x y h t   dk dk e   p   k   k   t H t kh g u   k   k dk dk e   t H t kh                             ∬ ∬  (56) SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  11 of 29 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 12

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  We find that that the two pressure changes do not agree              bottom 0   0 ,   ,   ,   ,   ,   , p x y h   t   p   x y h   t   inside the pressure change source. Such disagreement is also found in the tsunami height and velocity fields inside the pressure change source. These disagreements were not detectable in the past observations in which tsunami sensors were located only outside the source region. However, this difference should appear in recent tsunami ob- servations which are intended to detect tsunamis inside the source region.  3.3.   Moving Surface Pressure Change  We suppose a pressure change of the same spatial distribution as Equation 41 but moving with the propa- gation velocity   V 0   in the   x   direction:                                 2  0 2 surface   1   0   0 ,   ,  x   V t a p   x y t   p   x   V t H t   P e   H t  (57) As discussed using Equation 48, the tsunami is independent of the source duration   T   when the duration is much shorter than the characteristic time   T c . The vertical upward displacement, the velocities inside the sea layer, and the pressure change at the sea bottom are obtained by the convolution of the pressure change 57 with the impulse responses of Equations 32–37. The vertical upward displacement is                                                                                                                                           surface 1   0   0 2   2   0   0 0   0   0 2   0   0 0 ,   ,   ,   , 0,   ,   , 0,   ,   , 1   1   1   1   1   1 2   2 ˆ 2 1   1 1  z   x   y   z   x   y   x   y x ik   x   ik Vt   i   t   i   t x   x x x   x x x y t   u   x y   t   d   d   d u   x   y   t   p p   k dk e   e   e   e   H t k V   k V g   k V  ∬  (58) where     1 ˆ   x p   k   is the 1-D spatial Fourier transform of     1 p   x   Equation 58 corresponds to Equation 2.4 in the observation by Proudman (1929) but is not the same because we give the 3-D case including the dispersion, while the 2-D case without the dispersion was derived by Proudman (1929). Using    x k   k   , the horizontal and the vertical velocities are given by v   x y z t dk e   p   k g k h   z k x x ik x  x   x  ,   , , cosh sinh                                 1 2 1 0   0 0       h h kV k V   e k k   k V   e ik x V t x x i   t  0 0 0   2 0 2 0 2 0 0 0 0 1 1 2 1 1                                            k k   k V   e   H t x x i   t  2 1 1   0 0 0     (59) and v   x y z t   dk e   p   k g k h   z k z   x ik x  x   x  ,   , ,   sinh sinh                                1 2 1 0   0 0       h h   i k V k V   e k V   e x ik x V t x i   t  0 0 0 0 2 0 2 0 2 0 0 0 0 1 1 2 1 1                                         1 2 1 1   0 0 0  k V   e   H t x i   t     .  (60) SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  12 of 29 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 13

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  The pressure change is given by                                                        0   0  1   2   2   0 0   0 2   0 0 0 0 0 0 0   1 0   0 2 sinh 1   1   1   1 ,   , ,   2   2 sinh 2   1 1 1   1 2  1 sinh   2 sinh 1   . 2   sinh   sinh 2 ˆ ˆ  ik   x   ik V t   i   t x   x x   x x i   t x ik   x   V t x x   x kz p x y z t   dk e   p   k   e   e k V kh   k V e   H t k V k h   z   kz dk e   p   k   H t kh   kh                                                                                    (61) and p x y z   h   t dk e   p   k kh   k V   e x ik x  x   x  ,   ,   , cosh                            0 1 0 2 0 2 0 2 1 2 1 1                               ik x V t x i   t x i   t k V   e   k V   e   H t  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 1 1 1 2 1 1       1 1 2 0   1 0                             dk e   p   k kh   H t x ik x   x   V t   x    cosh   .  (62)  3.3.1.   Long-Wavelength Tsunamis  Using Equations 58–62, we visualize the wavefields caused by a moving negative pressure change in Fig- ure 3. The pressure change source is characterized by  0 P  1   mH 2 O (=   9.8   kPa) and  a   20 km in Equation 57. The pressure change source appears at    0 t   s and moves in the positive   x -direction with the velocity  0   0.2 V   km/s (    0 1.0   g h   ). At early times (Figures 3a and 3b), the tsunami height is small, less than 0.1 m. As the time increases, the tsunami height increases. At the time 500 s, the maximum height is about 2.5 m, which is considerably larger than the maximum height of 1 m that was observed in the case of a fixed source. This tsunami amplification is due to a moving source, which is often referred to as the Proudman effect (Proudman, 1929). Figure 4 shows the tsunami height distributions for various elapsed times. Appendix C describes the cases for different velocities of  0   0.18 V   km/s (    0   0 0.9   g h   ), and 0.22 km/s (    0   0 1.1   g h   ). The overall features of the tsunami heights were common between the cases of  0   0   0 0.9 V   g h   , 0   0 g h  , and 1.1 0   0 g h   . We further calculate the sea-surface height of Equation 58 using approximations to obtain interpretations of Figure 3. Since     1 p   x   is real,                1   1 ˆ   ˆ x   x p   k   p   k   where the asterisk denotes complex conjugation. We cal- culate Equation 58:                                            0   0 1   1 2 0   0 0   0   0 2 0 1 0 1   1   1   1   1 ˆ ,   ,   Re   Re 2  1 1 1   1   ˆ Re 2  1 ˆ ik   x   V t   i k   x   t x   x x   x   x i k   x   t x x p t x y t   dk   p   k   e   k   e V g   V c c p   k   e   H V c                                                                                              (63) where          Re   indicates the real part of the complex value and set the phase velocity as         /   /   x c   k   k   . We then assume that the pressure change propagation velocity   V 0   is almost the same as the tsunami phase velocity   c , or  0 V   c   , where setting     0   Δ c   V   V   and    0 Δ V   V   . We calculate Equation 63: SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  13 of 29 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 14

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  14 of 29  Figure 3.   Tsunami generation due to a moving surface pressure change for various elapsed times: (a)  t   4, (b) 30, (c) 60, (d) 120, (e) 250, and (f) 500 s. Top panel shows the pressure change at the surface. The source is given by Equation 57 where the peak pressure change is   P 0   = −1 mH 2O (   9.8   kPa), the duration is    30 T   s, the spatial scale is given by    20 a   km, and the velocity is given by  0   0.2 V   km/s (    0   0 g h   and   h 0   = 4 km). Second panel shows tsunami height or vertical upward displacement at the sea surface. Third panel shows velocity distribution  2   2  x   z v   v   in the sea layer with the depth   h 0   = 4 km. Bottom panel shows the pressure change at the sea bottom. 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 15

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans                                                       0 1 0   0   0 0   0 1 1 0   0 0   0 1 0 1 0   0   0 ,   , 1   1   1   1   Re 1   1 1  Re 2 1   1   1   1   Re 2   1 1   1   1   1 Δ 1   Re Δ   2   2 1  R ˆ ˆ 2 ˆ ˆ  ik   x   V t x x   x ik   x   ct x x ik   x   ct x x   x ik   x   V t x x   x x y t dk   p   k   e V   V g c   c p   k   e   H t dk   p   k   e   H t V g c c   V dk   p   k   e g   V   c                                                                                                                                                                                               Δ 0 1 1 1 0   0   0 Δ 0 1 0   0   0 0 1 1 0   0   0 e 1   1   1   1   1 Δ 1   Re 2   2   2 1   1   1 Re   1 Δ   2 1 Δ 4 1   1   1   1   1 Δ 1   Re 2   2 ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ 2  ik   x   V t   ik   Vt x   x x ik   x   ct x x   x ik   x   V t   ik   Vt x   x x   x ik   x   V t x x x p   k   e   e   H t V dk   p   k   e   H t g   c c dk   p   k   e   e g   V V  p   k   e   H t c V dk   p g   c                                                                                                                                                                      0 1 0   0   0 0 1 0   0   0 1 0   0   0 1   1   Re 2 1   1   Re 4 1   1   Re   . ˆ ˆ 4   ˆ  ik   x   ct x x ik   x   V x x   x c t t x ik   x   V x x   x ik   x   t x x   x k   e   H t dk   ct   ik p   k   e   H t g dk   p   k   e   H t g dk   p   k   e   H t g                                                                                   (64) In particular, when the wavelength is much longer than the sea depth,  0   1 kh   , the phase velocity   c   is inde- pendent of the wavenumber. Also, using the relation                                             1   1   1  0 1   1   Re 2   ˆ   ˆ ik   x   ik   x x   x x   x   x   x p   x   dk e   p   k   dk   e   p   k  (65) SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  15 of 29  Figure 4.   Tsunami height distributions for various elapsed times ( t   = 200, 400, 600 s). The source is given by Equation 57 where the peak pressure change is   P 0   = −1 mH 2O (   9.8   kPa), the spatial scale is given by    20 a   km, and the velocity is given by  0   0.2 V   km/s (    0   0 g h   and   h 0   = 4 km).  −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 Surface Height [m] Distance [km] 600s 400s 200s a = 20km, V 0   =(g 0   h 0   ) 1/2 −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 16

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  16 of 29  Figure 5.   Tsunami generation due to a moving surface pressure change for various elapsed times: (a)  t   4, (b) 30, (c) 60, (d) 120, (e) 250, and (f) 500 s. Top panel shows the pressure change at the surface. The source is given by Equation 57 where the peak pressure change is   P 0   = −1 mH 2O (   9.8   kPa), the duration is    30 T   s, the spatial scale is given by    10 a   km, and the velocity is given by  0   0.2 V   km/s (    0   0 g h   and   h 0   = 4 km). Second panel shows tsunami height or vertical upward displacement at the sea surface. Third panel shows velocity distribution  2   2  x   z v   v   in the sea layer with the depth   h 0   = 4 km. Bottom panel shows the pressure change at the sea bottom. 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 17

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  we obtain                                                         1   0   1   0   1 0   0   0   0   0   0 1   1   1 ,   ,   2   4   4  d x y t   ct   p   x   V t H t   p   x   V t H t   p   x   ct H t g   dx   g   g  (66) SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  17 of 29  Figure 6.   Tsunami generation due to a moving surface pressure change. Instead of the dispersion relation          0   0   0 tanh g k   kh  (Equation 27), we set     0   0   0 k   g h   in this simulation to remove wave dispersion. Other parameters are the same as those in Figure 4. 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 18

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  The first and the second terms indicate the waves propagating along the positive   x   direction. In particu- lar, the first term increases with increasing time or with the travel distance   ct . As a result, the first term becomes dominant over the second term for long travel distances. The waveform is given by the spatial derivative of the pressure change distribution. This feature is confirmed in Figure 3. The spatial deriva- tive increases the short-wavelength components. An increase in the short-wavelength component is also observed in the waves propagating in the same direction as a moving source in kinematic source models (e.g., Ben-Menahem, 1961). Similarly, the pressure change at the sea bottom (Equation 62) is calculated as                                                                  0 0 1 2 0 0   0   2 0 1 0 2 0 1 0 0 1 0   0 0   0 , ,   , 1   ˆ Re 1   1 1 cosh 1   1   Re 2  1 1   1   Re 2  1 1   1   ˆ Re cosh 1   1   Re 2 cos ˆ h ˆ  ik   x   V t x x x i k   x   t x x i k   x   t x x ik   x   V t x x   x x   x p x y z   h   t p   k   e dk   V kh k   e V c k   e   H t V c dk   p   k   e   H t kh c p p dk   ct   ik kh                                                                                                                                                                                    0 1 0 1 0   0 1 0   0 0 1 0   0 1   1   Re 4 cosh 1   1   Re 4 cosh 1   1   Re   . s ˆ ˆ c   h ˆ ˆ o  ik   x   V t x x ik   x   V t x x   x ik   x   ct x x   x ik   x   V t x x   x k   e   H t dk   k   e   H t kh dk   k   e   H t kh dk   k   e   H t k   p h p p p                                                                         (67) For the long-wavelength tsunamis  0   1 kh   , we obtain p x y h t   ct  d dx  p   x   V t H t   p   x   V t H t   p   x   ct ,   ,   ,                                      1 2 3 4 1 4 1   0   1   0   1                        H t g   x y t   p   x y t      0   0   ,   ,   ,   ,   . surface  (68) The pressure change is given by the sum of two contributions: sea-surface height change         0   0   ,   , g   x y t   and pressure change loaded at the sea surface     surface   ,   , p   x y t   . This indicates that it is not easy to measure the tsunami height   η ( x ,   y ,   t ) correctly from the ocean-bottom pressure change     0 ,   ,   , p x y h   t   . We need to know the sea-surface pressure change     surface   ,   , p   x y t   to correctly estimate   η ( x ,   y ,   t ). For example, in the case where the time is 60 s (Figure 3c), the ocean-bottom pressure change is negative  0.5   mH2 O. However, the actual tsunami height is positive (0.5 m).  3.3.2.   Dispersive Tsunamis  We then simulate the case of a shorter wavelength (  a   10 km in Equation 57) pressure change source, where the wavelength of the pressure change is not much longer than the sea depth. Figure 5 shows the temporal changes of the wavefields in the case of  0   0   0 1.0 V   g h   . In Figure 6, in order to compare dispersive and nondispersive tsunamis, we also plot the wavefields without dispersion by setting     0   0   0 k   g h   in Equa- tions 59–62 instead of setting the dispersion relation of Equation 26. Comparing Figure 5f with Figure 6f, SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  18 of 29 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 19

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  we recognized that dispersion appears when the wave propagates over long distances. Figure 7 compares the tsunami height distributions at various elapsed times for dispersive and nondispersive simulations. We found that the maximum tsunami height is attenuated more due to dispersion. The attenuation effect due to dispersion is recognized also in the case of  0   0   0 1.1 V   g h   (Figures C2c and C3c in Appendix C). On the other hand, in the case of  0   0   0 0.9 V   g h   (Figure 8), the first negative wave becomes smaller, whereas the maximum height of the second wave becomes higher due to dispersion. It is interesting that the dispersion possibly enlarges the maximum tsunami height for the moving pressure change source, although it reduces the maximum sea-surface height of tsunamis arising from thrust fault earthquakes (e.g., Saito et al., 2014). A dispersive-tsunami amplification was also reported for normal fault earthquakes (Baba et al. 2020) and landslide tsunamis dominated by short-wavelength waves (Baba et al., 2019). Equations 67 and 68 show that pressure change is given by the sum of two contributions: sea-surface height change and pressure change loaded at the sea surface. When the wavelength was long, we approximated Equation 67 as Equation 68. However, when the wavelength is short, we cannot use Equation 68. The factor     0 1 / cosh   kh   works as a low-wavelength-pass filter for the ocean-bottom pressure change. Tsunamis for which the wavelength is much shorter than the sea depth (  0   1) kh   do not contribute to ocean-bottom pressure change.  4.   Conclusions  We formulated 3-D tsunami generation by pressure changes on the sea surface in an incompressible sea. We simulated the tsunami generation by a growing pressure change at a fixed location. We found that a SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  19 of 29  Figure 7.   Tsunami height distributions for various elapsed times (  t   200, 400, 600 s). (a) The source is given by Equation 57 where the peak pressure change is   P 0   = −1 mH 2O (   9.8   kPa), the duration is    30 T   s, the spatial scale is given by    10 a   km, and the velocity is given by  0   0.20 V   km/s (    0   0 1.0   g h   and   h 0   = 4 km). (b) Instead of the dispersion relation          0   0   0 tanh g k   kh   (Equation 26), we set     0   0   0 k   g h   in this simulation to remove wave dispersion. Other parameters are the same as those in Figure 7a.  −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 Surface Height [m] Distance [km] 600s 400s 200s a = 10km, V 0   = (g 0   h 0   ) 1/2  (a)   Dispersion  −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 Surface Height [m] Distance [km] 600s 400s 200s a = 10km, V 0   = (g 0   h 0   ) 1/2  (b)   No Dispersion  −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 20

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  negative sea-surface pressure change made the sea-surface height uplifted inside the source region and negative leading waves radiated from the source. We also simulated a case when the tsunamis are generated by a moving pressure change. When the pressure change migrates near the tsunami-propagation veloci- ty, the tsunami height increases with increasing travel distance. This was originally predicted by Proud- man (1929) in the 2-D long-wave theory. The solutions in this study are in a 3-D space that can include the depth-dependent particle velocities and pressure distributions in the sea. The derived solutions of the pressure changes suggest that both the tsunami height and the sea-surface pressure changes contribute to the ocean-bottom pressure change. This means that we can detect tsunamis by using ocean-bottom pressure gauges but need to know the sea-surface pressure change to correctly measure tsunami height by using the pressure gauges. Moreover, when the pressure change source was characterized by short-wavelength com- ponents, tsunamis showed dispersion. The dispersion sometimes possibly increases tsunami height more extensively than the predictions assuming nondispersive tsunamis. The solutions derived in this study are useful for recent offshore tsunami observations where the pressure gauges possibly detect the tsunami gen- eration process with meteorological origins.  Appendix A:   Integration Using Residue Theorem  The vertical displacement     ,   ,   , z u   x y z t   (Equation 24) includes an integration with respect to   ω :                        2   2  0 1   1   1 2  i   t f   t   d   e   i  (A1) SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  20 of 29  Figure 8.   Tsunami height distributions for various elapsed times (  t   200, 400, 600 s). (a) The source is given by Equation 57 where the peak pressure change is   P 0   = −1 mH 2 O (   9.8   kPa), the duration is    30 T   s, the spatial scale is given by    10 a   km, and the velocity is given by  0   0.18 V   km/s (    0   0 0.9   g h   and  h 0   = 4 km). (b) Instead of the dispersion relation          0   0   0 tanh g k   kh   (Equation 27), we set     0   0   0 k   g h   in this simulation to remove wave dispersion. Other parameters are the same as those in Figure 8a.  −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 Surface Height [m] Distance [km] 600s 400s 200s a = 10km, V 0   = 0.9(g 0 h 0   )   1/2  (a)   Dispersion  −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 Surface Height [m] Distance [km] 600s 400s 200s a = 10km, V 0   = 0.9(g 0 h 0   )   1/2  (b)   No Dispersion  −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 21

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  where          0   0   0 tanh g k   kh  (A2) Here, we introduce an artificial damping into Equation A1 using very small parameters 1     and 2     and consid- er a closed complex integral on the complex   ω   plane                              2   2   2 1   0 1   1   1 2   2  i   t g t   d   e   i   i i  ∮     (A3) Figure A1 shows the complex   ω   plane for Equation A3, where the poles are located at                   0   1   0   1   2 ,   ,   . i   i   i        (A4) For    0 t   , we take the closed integration path (i) in the region     0 Im   . There are no poles inside the path (i). The integration along the semicircular path in the upper omega plane,     0 Im   , becomes zero in Equa- tion A3. We then obtain        0 f   t   for    0 t   . For    0 t   , we take the path (ii) for the integration and have                                               0   0 2   Res   Res   Res 0   for   0 f   t   i   t  (A5) where      0 Res   means the residue at        0   . Calculating the residue values and considering that integration along the semicircular path in the lower omega plane,     0 Im   , yields zero, we obtain                      0 2 0 1   1   cos   for   0 f   t   t   t  (A6) Combining the results of    0 t   and    0 t   , we get                                              0 2   2   2 0   0 1   1   1   1   1   cos 2  i   t f   t   d   e   t   H t i  (A7) where   H ( t ) is a step function        1 H t   when   0 t   and        0 H t   when   0 t   . Using Equation A7, we cal- culate the vertical displacement as SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  21 of 29  Figure A1.   Integration paths of the complex integration for Equation A3.  −ω 0   ω   0  Re   ω  Im   ω  Path (i) Path (ii) 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 22

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans τ                                                                        ,   , ,   sinh                                    1 2   2 2 0 0                                            cosh ,   cos  kh p   k   k k   t   H t dk x   y x  0 0 0 2   0 2 1   1 1 2      d dk e   p   k   k g k h   z kh y i k x  x   k y  y   x   y                                 0 0   0 0 0 1 ,   sinh sinh   cos    0 0 t   H t                (A8) where we used the dispersion relation          0   0   0 tanh g k   kh   . This is the same as Equation 1,25.  Appendix B:   Tsunami Generation Due to Sea-Bottom Deformation  This appendix derives the equations for tsunami generation due to sea-bottm deformation with the propagator matrix method. The 3-D linear momentum equation (Equation 1), stress tensor (Equa- tion 2), and no-dilatation equation (Equation 3) are the same as those used in the surface pressure change source.                                            2 0   0   0 2 ,   , ,  z   z  x y z t   g   u t  u   τ   u e  (B1)             ,   ,   ,   ,   , , x y z t   p x y z t τ   I  (B2)        0 u  (B3) The boundary condition at the sea surface is        ,   , 0,   0. p x y   t  (B4) The vertical displacement at the sea bottom is given by                                                0   0   2 1   ˆ ,   ,   ,   ,   , 2  i k   x   k   y x   y z   x   y   x   y u   x y h   t   u   x y H t   dk dk u k   k   e   H t ∬  (B5) for a sudden sea-bottom deformation. Using the same procedure as for Equation 13, we obtain                                                                                                     0   11   0   12   0 21   0   22   0 0 ,   ,   ,   ,   , 0,   . 0 ,   ,   ,  z   x   y   z   x   y z   x   y U   k   k   h   A   h   A   h   U   k   k A   h   A   h T   k   k   h  (B6) where the matrix   A ( z ) is the same as Equation 11 and                    0 1 ,   ,   ,   ,   . ˆ z   x   y   x   y U   k   k   h   u k   k i  (B7) For example, we show the procedure for deriving the ocean-bottom pressure change     0 ,   ,   , p x y h   t   .   Equa- tion B6 gives                          21   0 0   0 11   0 ,   ,   ,   ,   ,   ,   . z   x   y   z   x   y A   h T   k   k   h   U   k   k   h A   h  (B8) SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  22 of 29 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 23

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  Using Equation 6 and Equation B8, the pressure change at the sea bottom is p x y h   t   d   e   dk dk   A   h A   h   U i   t x   y ,   ,   , 0   2 21   0 11   0 1 2 1 2                                      z z   x   y i k x   k   y x   y i k x   k   y k   k   h   ke dk dk e   h x   y x   y  ,   ,   , 0 2   0 1 2                              t tanh   kh kh   d   e   i   i   g k i   t 0 0 3 2 0 2 0 2   2 2 0 2 1 2                                         (B9) Using the residue theorem (see Appendix A), we calculate Equation B9. However, we should note that we cannot directly apply the residue theorem for the integral in                         3 2   2 0  1 2  i   t   i g t   d   e  (B10) that appears in Equation B9 because integration along the semicircular path does not yield zero. Therefore, instead of Equation B9, we consider the following integral:                                       0 2   2   2 0   0 1   1   1   1   1   cos   . 2  i   t d   e   t   H t i  (B11) Note that we calculated this in Appendix A with the residue theorem. By differentiating the left-hand side of Equation B11 twice with respect to time, we obtain the left-hand side as                  2   2  0 1 2  i   t   i d   e  (B12) and the right-hand side as d dt   t   H t   d dt   t H t  2 2 0 2   0 0 0 0 2 1   1   1   1   1                                              cos   sin                                                      cos sin   cos          0 0 0   0 1  t   t d dt   t H t   t H H t   t   t t H t                           1 0 0 0         sin cos  (B13) Therefore, we obtain                               0 2   2 0 1   cos 2  i   t   i d   e   t H t  (B14) Again, we differentiate Equation B14 twice with respect to time and obtain 1 2 3 2 0 2 2 2   0   0   0                                                  d   e   i   d dt   t H t   d dt i   t   cos   sin   t t H t   t   t d dt   t H t   t                                                    cos sin               0 0   0 0 2   c cos   sin cos                   0   0   0 0 2 0  t H t   t   t   d   t dt t H t   d   t                                             dt   .  (B15) SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  23 of 29 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 24

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  Hence, we obtain                                         3   2 0   0 2   2 0 1   cos 2  i   t   d   t i d   e   t H t   dt  (B16) Using Equation B11 and B16, we calculate Equation B9 as                                                                                                      0   0 0   0 2   2 0 0 0   0   0   0 0 0 0   0   0   0 2   2 0 0 0   0   0 0 0 ˆ   , 1 ,   ,   ,   cos 2   cosh tan h   ˆ   ,   '   , ˆ   , 1   cos 2   cosh tanh   ˆ   ,   ' ˆ                                                            x   y x   y i k x   k   y   x   y x   y x   y   x   y i k x   k   y   x   y x   y x   y g u   k   k p x y h   t   dk dk e   t H t kh kh h   u   k   k   t   g u   k   k   H t kh g u   k   k dk dk e   t H t kh kh h   u   k   k   t   g u kh  ∬ ∬          0   , x y H t  (B17) The first term represents the loading from the sea-surface height, the second term represents the dynamic pressure change caused by the accelerating sea-bottom deformation, and the third term represents the hy- drostatic pressure change due to the sea-bottom displacement. Similarly, using Equation B12, we obtain the sea-surface height                                                       0 0 2   0 , 1 ,   ,   ,   , 0,   cos cos ˆ h 2  x   y i k   x   k   y x   y z   x   y u   k   k x y t   u   x y   t   dk dk e   t H t kh  ∬  (B18)  Appendix C:   Tsunami Generation Due to a Moving Surface Pressure Change  Figure C1 shows the tsunami height distributions for a sea depth of   h 0   = 4 km and a moving pressure size of  a   = 20 km. The velocity of the surface pressure source is set as (a)  0   0.18 V   km/s (    0   0 0.9   g h   ), (b)  0   0.2 V  km/s (    0   0 1.0   g h   ), and (c) 0.22 km/s (    0   0 1.1   g h   ). Figure C2 shows the tsunami height distributions for a sea depth of   h 0   = 4 km and a moving pressure size of   a   = 10 km. The velocity of the surface pressure source is set as (a)  0   0.18 V   km/s (    0   0 0.9   g h   ), (b)  0   0.2 V  km/s (    0   0 1.0   g h   ), and (c) 0.22 km/s (    0   0 1.1   g h   ). In order to examine the effects of dispersion in Figures C2 and C3 plots the wavefields without dispersion by setting     0   0   0 k   g h   in Equations 60–64 instead of setting the dispersion relation of Equation 26. All other parameters are common between Figures C2 and C3. SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  24 of 29 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 25

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  25 of 29  Figure C1.   Tsunami height distributions for various elapsed times (  t   200, 400, 600 s). The source is given by Equation 57 where the peak pressure change is   P 0   = −1 mH 2 O (   9.8   kPa) and the spatial scale is given by    20 a   km. The velocity of the surface pressure source is set as (a)  0   0.18 V   km/s (    0   0 0.9   g h   ), (b)  0   0.2 V   km/s (    0   0 1.0   g h   ), and (c) 0.22 km/s (    0   0 1.1   g h   ).  −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 Surface Height [m] Distance [km] 600s 400s 200s a = 20km, V 0   = 0.9(g 0 h 0   )   1/2  (a)  −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 Surface Height [m] Distance [km] 600s 400s 200s a = 20km, V 0   = (g 0   h 0   ) 1/2  (b)  −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 Surface Height [m] Distance [km] 600s 400s 200s a = 20km, V 0   = 1.1(g 0 h 0   )   1/2  (c)  −4 −2 0 2 4 −50   0   50   100   150 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 26

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  26 of 29  Figure C2.   Tsunami height distributions for various elapsed times ( t   = 200, 400, 600 s). The source is given by Equation 57 where the peak pressure change is   P 0   = −1 mH 2O (   9.8   kPa) and the spatial scale is given by    10 a   km. The velocity of the surface pressure source is set as (a)  0   0.18 V   km/s (    0   0 0.9   g h   ), (b)  0   0.2 V   km/s (    0   0 1.0   g h   ), and (c) 0.22 km/s (    0   0 1.1   g h   ).  −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 Surface Height [m] Distance [km] 600s 400s 200s a = 10km, V 0   = 0.9(g 0 h 0   )   1/2  (a)  −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 Surface Height [m] Distance [km] 600s 400s 200s a = 10km, V 0   = (g 0   h 0   ) 1/2  (b)  −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 Surface Height [m] Distance [km] 600s 400s 200s a = 10km, V 0   = 1.1(g 0 h 0   )   1/2  (c)  −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 27

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  27 of 29  Figure C3.   Tsunami height distributions for various elapsed times. Instead of the dispersion relation          0   0   0 tanh g k   kh  (Equation 26), we set     0   0   0 k   g h   in this simulation to remove wave dispersion. Other parameters are the same as those in Figure C2.  −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 Surface Height [m] Distance [km] 600s 400s 200s a = 10km, V 0   = 0.9(g 0 h 0   )   1/2  (a)   No Dispersion  −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 Surface Height [m] Distance [km] 600s 400s 200s a = 10km, V 0   = (g 0   h 0   ) 1/2  (b)  −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 Surface Height [m] Distance [km] 600s 400s 200s a = 10km, V 0   = 1.1(g 0 h 0   )   1/2  (c)  −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 −50   0   50   100   150 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 28

Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans Data Availability Statement  This study does not use observed data. All the results are obtained from the equations derived in this study.  References  Aki, K., & Richards, P. (2002).   Quantitative Seismology   (2nd ed.). University Science Books. An, C., Liu, P. L. F., & Seo, S. N. (2012). Large-scale edge waves generated by a moving atmospheric pressure.   Theoretical and Applied Mechanics Letters ,   2 (4), 042001. https://doi.org/10.1063/2.1204201 Aoi, S., Asano, Y., Kunugi, T., Kimura, T., Uehira, K., Takahashi, N., et al. (2020). MOWLAS: NIED observation network for earthquake, tsunami and volcano.   Earth Planets and Space ,   72 , 126. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40623-020-01250-x Baba, T., Chikasada, N., Nakamura, Y., Fujie, G., Obana, K., Miura, S., & Kodaira, S. (2020). Deep investigations of outer-rise tsunami characteristics using well-mapped normal faults along the Japan trench.   Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth ,   125 (10). https:// doi.org/10.1029/2020JB020060 Baba, T., Gon, Y., Imai, K., Yamashita, K., Matsuno, T., Hayashi, M., & Ichihara, H. (2019). Modeling of a dispersive tsunami caused by a submarine landslide based on detailed bathymetry of the continental slope in the Nankai trough, southwest Japan.   Tectonophysics ,  768 (3), 228182. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tecto.2019.228182 Baba, T., Takahashi, N., Kaneda, Y., Ando, K., Matsuoka, D., & Kato, T. (2015). Parallel implementation of dispersive tsunami wave mode- ling with a nesting algorithm for the 2011 Tohoku tsunami.   Pure and Applied Geophysics ,   172 (12), 3455–3472. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s00024-015-1049-2 Ben-Menahem, A. (1961). Radiation of seismic surface-waves from finite moving sources.   Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America ,  51 (3), 401–435.Retrieved from https://pubs.geoscienceworld.org/bssa/article-lookup/51/3/401 Bernard, E. N., & Meinig, C. (2011). History and future of deep-ocean tsunami measurements. In   Ocean'11 MTS/IEEE KONA   (pp. 1–7). Churchill, D. D., Houston, S. H., & Bond, N. A. (1995). The daytona beach wave of 3-4 July 1992: A shallow-water gravity wave forced by a propagating squall line.   Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society ,   76 (1), 21–32. https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0477(1995)076<0 021:tdbwoj>2.0.co;2 Dahlen, F. A., & Tromp, J. (1998).   Theoretical Global Seismology . Princeton University Press. Gilbert, F., & Backus, G. E. (1966). Propagator matrices in elastic wave and vibration problems.   Geophysics ,   31 , 326–332. https://doi. org/10.1190/1.1439771 Gill, A. (1982).   Atmosphere-Ocean Dynamics   (pp. 662). Academic. Greenspan, H. P. (1956). The generation of edge waves by moving pressure distributions.   Journal of Fluid Mechanics ,   1 (06), 574. https:// doi.org/10.1017/S002211205600038X Grilli, S. T., Harris, J. C., Tajalli Bakhsh, T. S., Masterlark, T. L., Kyriakopoulos, C., Kirby, J. T., & Shi, F. (2013). Numerical simulation of the 2011 Tohoku tsunami based on a new transient FEM co-seismic source: Comparison to far- and near-field observations.   Pure and Applied Geophysics ,   170 (6–8), 1333–1359. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00024-012-0528-y Heidarzadeh, M., Šepić, J., Rabinovich, A., Allahyar, M., Soltanpour, A., & Tavakoli, F. (2020). Meteorological tsunami of 19 March 2017 in the Persian Gulf: Observations and analyses.   Pure and Applied Geophysics ,   177 (3), 1231–1259. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s00024-019-02263-8 Hibiya, T., & Kajiura, K. (1982). Origin of theAbiki phenomenon (a kind of seiche) in Nagasaki Bay.   Journal of the Oceanographical Society of Japan ,   38 (3), 172–182. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02110288 Inazu, D., & Saito, T. (2014). Two subevents across the Japan Trench during the 7 December 2012 off Tohoku earthquake (Mw 7.3) inferred from offshore tsunami records.   Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth ,   119 (7), 5800–5813. https://doi.org/10.1002/2013JB010892 Kanazawa, T., Uehira, K., Mochizuki, M., Shinbo, T., Fujimoto, H., Noguchi, S., et al. (2016). S-net project, cabled observation network for earthquakes and tsunamis. In   Paper presented at SubOptic 2016, Dubai . Kaneda, Y., Kawaguchi, K., Araki, E., Matsumoto, H., Nakamura, T., Kamiya, S., et al. (2015). Development and application of an advanced ocean floor network system for megathrust earthquakes and tsunamis. In P. Favali, et al. (Eds.),   Seafloor Observatories   (pp. 643–662). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-11374-1_25 Kawaguchi, K., Kaneko, S., Nishida, T., & Komine, T. (2015). Construction of the DONET real-time seafloor observatory for earthquakes and tsunami   monitoring,   In   P.   Favali,   etal.   (Eds.),   Seafloor   Observatories   (pp.   211–228).   Springer.   https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-11374-1_10 Kirby, J. T., Shi, F., Tehranirad, B., Harris, J. C., & Grilli, S. T. (2013). Dispersive tsunami waves in the ocean: Model equations and sensitiv- ity to dispersion and Coriolis effects.   Ocean Modelling ,   62 , 39–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocemod.2012.11.009 Kubota, T., Saito, T., Chikasada, N. Y., & Suzuki, W. (2020a). Ultra-broadband seismic and tsunami wave observation of high-sampling ocean-bottom pressure gauge covering periods from seconds to hours.   Earth and Space Science ,   7 (10), e2020EA001197. https://doi. org/10.1029/2020ea001197 Kubota, T., Saito, T., & Suzuki, W. (2020b). Millimeter-scale tsunami detected by a wide and dense observation array in the deep ocean: Fault modeling of an Mw 6.0 interplate earthquake off Sanriku, NE Japan.   Geophysical Research Letters ,   47 (4), 1–11. https://doi. org/10.1029/2019GL085842 Lotto, G. C., & Dunham, E. M. (2015). High-order finite difference modeling of tsunami generation in a compressible ocean from offshore earthquakes.   Computational Geosciences ,   19 (2), 327–340. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10596-015-9472-0 Lotto, G. C., Nava, G., & Dunham, E. M. (2017). Should tsunami simulations include a nonzero initial horizontal velocity?   Earth Planets and Space ,   69 (1), 117. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40623-017-0701-8 Maeda, T., & Furumura, T. (2013). FDM simulation of seismic waves, ocean acoustic waves, and tsunamis based on tsunami-coupled equa- tions of motion.   Pure and Applied Geophysics ,   170 (1–2), 109–127. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00024-011-0430-z Mikada, H., Mitsuzawa, K., Matsumoto, H., Watanabe, T., Morita, S., Otsuka, R., et al. (2006). New discoveries in dynamics of an M8 earthquake-phenomena and their implications from the 2003 Tokachi-oki earthquake using a long term monitoring cabled observatory.  Tectonophysics ,   426 (1–2), 95–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tecto.2006.02.021 Mizutani,   A., Yomogida,   K.,   & Tanioka, Y.   (2020).   Early   tsunami   detection   with   near-fault   ocean-bottom   pressure   gauge   re- cords based on the comparison with seismic data at common sites.   Journal of Geophysical Reasearch ,   125 (9), e2020JC016275. https://doi.org/10.1029/2020JC016275 SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  28 of 29  Acknowledgments  This study is supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) KAKENHI Grant Number 19H02409. The authors greatly appre- ciate helpful suggestions made by three anonymous reviewers. 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

# Page 29

29 of 29  Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans  SAITO ET AL. 10.1029/2020JC017011  29 of 29 Monserrat, S., Vilibić, I., & Rabinovich, A. B. (2006). Meteotsunamis: Atmospherically induced destructive ocean waves in the tsunami frequency band.   Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences ,   6 (6), 1035–1051. https://doi.org/10.5194/nhess-6-1035-2006 Mungov, G., Eblé, M., & Bouchard, R. (2013). DART tsunameter retrospective and real-time data: A reflection on 10 years of process- ing in support of tsunami research and operations.   Pure and Applied Geophysics ,   170 (9–10), 1369–1384. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s00024-012-0477-5 Nosov, M. A., Kolesov, S. V., Denisova, A. V., Alekseev, A. B., & Levin, B. V. (2007). On the near-bottom pressure variations in the region of the 2003 Tokachi-Oki tsunami source.   Oceanology ,   47 (1), 26–32. https://doi.org/10.1134/s0001437007010055 Pedlosky,   J.   (2003).   Waves   in   the   ocean   and   atmosphere:   Introduction   to   wave   dynamics .   Springer   Berlin.   https://doi. org/10.1007/978-3-662-05131-3 Proudman, J. (1929). The effects on the sea of changes in atmospheric pressure.   Geophysical Journal International ,   2 , 197–209. https://doi. org/10.1111/j.1365-246X.1929.tb05408.x Rabinovich, A. B., & Eblé, M. C. (2015). Deep-ocean measurements of tsunami waves.   Pure and Applied Geophysics ,   172 , 3281–3312. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00024-015-1058-1 Rabinovich, A. B., Šepić, J., & Thomson, R. E. (2020).   The meteorological tsunami of 1 November 2010 in the southern Strait of Georgia: A case study. Natural Hazards . Springer Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-020-04203-5 Saito, T. (2013). Dynamic tsunami generation due to sea-bottom deformation: Analytical representation based on linear potential theory.  Earth Planets and Space ,   65 (12), 1411–1423. https://doi.org/10.5047/eps.2013.07.004 Saito, T. (2019).   Tsunami generation and propagation . Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-4-431-56850-6 Saito, T., Baba, T., Inazu, D., Takemura, S., & Fukuyama, E. (2019). Synthesizing sea surface height change including seismic waves and tsunami using a dynamic rupture scenario of anticipated Nankai trough earthquakes.   Tectonophysics ,   769 , 228166. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.tecto.2019.228166 Saito, T., & Furumura, T. (2009). Three-dimensional tsunami generation simulation due to sea-bottom deformation and its interpretation based on the linear theory.   Geophysical Journal International ,   178 (2), 877–888. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-246X.2009.04206.x Saito, T., Inazu, D., Miyoshi, T., & Hino, R. (2014). Dispersion and nonlinear effects in the 2011 Tohoku-Oki earthquake tsunami.   Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans ,   119 (8), 5160–5180. https://doi.org/10.1002/2014JC009971 Saito, T., & Kubota, T. (2020). Tsunami modeling for the deep sea and inside focal areas.   Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences ,   48 , 121–145. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-earth-071719-054845 Saito, T., & Tsushima, H. (2016). Synthesizing ocean bottom pressure records including seismic wave and tsunami contributions: Toward   realistic   tests   of   monitoring   systems.   Journal of   Geophysical Research: Solid Earth ,   121 (11),   8175–8195.   https://doi. org/10.1002/2016JB013195 Sandanbata, O., Watada, S., Satake, K., Fukao, Y., Sugioka, H., Ito, A., & Shiobara, H. (2018). Ray tracing for dispersive tsunamis and source amplitude estimation based on green's law: Application to the 2015 volcanic tsunami earthquake near Torishima, South of Japan.   Pure and Applied Geophysics ,   175 (4), 1371–1385. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00024-017-1746-0 Segall, P. (2010).   Earthquake and volcano deformation . Princeton University Press. https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400833856 Seo, S.-N., & Liu, P. L.-F. (2014). Edge waves generated by atmospheric pressure disturbances moving along a shoreline on a sloping beach.  Coastal Engineering ,   85 , 43–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coastaleng.2013.12.002 Šepić, J., Vilibić, I., Rabinovich, A. B., & Monserrat, S. (2015). Widespread tsunami-like waves of 23-27 June in the Mediterranean and Black Seas generated by high-altitude atmospheric forcing.   Scientific Reports ,   5 (1), 11682. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep11682 Takahashi, R. (1942). On seismic sea waves caused by deformations of the sea bottom.   Bulletin of the Earthquake Research Institute ,   20 , 357–400. (in Japanese with English abstract). Tsushima, H., Ohta, Y., & Ohta, Y. (2014). Review on near-field tsunami forecasting from offshore tsunami data and onshore GNSS data for tsunami early warning.   Journal of Disaster Research ,   9 (3), 339–357. https://doi.org/10.20965/jdr.2014.p0339 Williams, D. A., Horsburgh, K. J., Schultz, D. M., & Hughes, C. W. (2019). Examination of generation mechanisms for an english chan- nel meteotsunami: Combining observations and modeling.   Journal of Physical Oceanography ,   49 (1), 103–120. https://doi.org/10.1175/ JPO-D-18-0161.1 21699291, 2021, 5, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020JC017011 by Ministry Of Health, Wiley Online Library on [26/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

## Figure Captions (auto-extracted)

- **p.2 (Fig 1.)** Figure 1. Coordinates used in the formulation. : 3 effects, which prevents us from extracting the details of the generation = process. Besides, because the tide gauges are located in very shallow sea 2
- **p.8** Figures 2a and 2b show that the sea-surface pressure, which we set as a source, decreases with time until a t = T (= 30s). During this period, the sea-surface height and the velocity in the sea layer change slightly and g do not show significant variations (the second and third panels in Figures 2a and 2b). =
- **p.9 (Fig 2.)** Figure 2. Tsunami generation due to a nonmoving surface pressure change for various elapsed times: (a) t = 4, g (b) 30, (c) 60, (d) 120, (e) 250, and (f) 500 s. Top panels show the pressure change at the surface where the peak S$ pressure change is P, = —1 mH,0O (~ —-9.8 kPa), the duration is T = 30 s and the spatial scale is given by a = 20 km g
- **p.14 (Fig 3.)** Figure 3. Tsunami generation due to a moving surface pressure change for various elapsed times: (a) r = 4, (b) 30, = (c) 60, (d) 120, (e) 250, and (f) 500 s. Top panel shows the pressure change at the surface. The source is given by 9 Equation 57 where the peak pressure change is Py = —1 mH,0 (~ -9.8 kPa), the duration is T = 30 s, the spatial scale is =}
- **p.15 (Fig 4.)** Figure 4. Tsunami height distributions for various elapsed times (t = 200, 400, 600 s). The source is given by 2 Equation 57 where the peak pressure change is Py = —1 mH,0 (~ -9.8 kPa), the spatial scale is given by a = 20 km, and 7 the velocity is given by V, = 0.2 km/s (= \/g hy, and hy = 4 km). 2
- **p.16 (Fig 5.)** Figure 5. Tsunami generation due to a moving surface pressure change for various elapsed times: (a) r = 4, (b) 30, = (c) 60, (d) 120, (e) 250, and (f) 500 s. Top panel shows the pressure change at the surface. The source is given by ° Equation 57 where the peak pressure change is Py = —1 mH,0 (~ -9.8 kPa), the duration is T = 30 s, the spatial scale is 2
- **p.17 (Fig 6.)** Figure 6. Tsunami generation due to a moving surface pressure change. Instead of the dispersion relation = wy = +|8ok tanh (kz ) (Equation 27), we set w, = k./gyh, in this simulation to remove wave dispersion. Other > parameters are the same as those in Figure 4. 2
- **p.19 (Fig 7.)** Figure 7. Tsunami height distributions for various elapsed times (+ = 200, 400, 600 s). (a) The source is given by E Equation 57 where the peak pressure change is P, = —1 mH,0 (~ —-9.8 kPa), the duration is 7" = 30 s, the spatial Ei scale is given by a = 10 km, and the velocity is given by V;, = 0.20 km/s (= 1.0,/g,h, and hy = 4 km). (b) Instead of z
- **p.20 (Fig 8.)** Figure 8. Tsunami height distributions for various elapsed times (¢ = 200, 400, 600 s). (a) The source is given by Equation 57 where the peak pressure change E
- **p.21** Figure Al. Integration paths of the complex integration for Equation A3. : where : @ = 1|gok tanh (kh, (A2) 5
- **p.21** Figure Al shows the complex w plane for Equation A3, where the poles are located at : a = ay — le, — Wy — le, — 16. (A4) 5 For t < 0, we take the closed integration path (i) in the region Im @ > 0. There are no poles inside the path :
- **p.24** Figure C1 shows the tsunami height distributions for a sea depth of hy = 4 km and a moving pressure size of 5 a = 20 km. The velocity of the surface pressure source is set as (a) V; = 0.18 km/s (= 0.9,/g,h, ), (b) V;, = 0.2 g km/s (= 1.04/goh ), and (c) 0.22 km/s (= 1.14/ go hg ). :
- **p.24** Figure C2 shows the tsunami height distributions for a sea depth of hy = 4 km and a moving pressure size : of a = 10 km. The velocity of the surface pressure source is set as (a) V, = 0.18 km/s (= 0.9y/g,%, ), (b) : Vo = 0.2 km/s (= 1.04/goh, ), and (c) 0.22 km/s (= 1.14/gyhy ). 2
- **p.25** Figure C1. Tsunami height distributions for various elapsed times (r = 200, 400, 600 s). The source is given by E Equation 57 where the peak pressure change is P, = —1 mH,0 (~ —9.8 kPa) and the spatial scale is given by a = 20 km. S The velocity of the surface pressure source is set as (a) V, = 0.18 km/s (= 0.9y/gyh, ), (b) Vy; = 0.2 km/s (= 1.0,/gohg ), d
- **p.26** Figure C2. Tsunami height distributions for various elapsed times (t = 200, 400, 600 s). The source is given b z 8 g g y 2 Equation 57 where the peak pressure change is P, = —1 mH,0 (~ —9.8 kPa) and the spatial scale is given by a = 10 km. S
- **p.27** Figure C3. Tsunami height distributions for various elapsed times. Instead of the dispersion relation 5 Wy = +|&ok tanh (kz ) (Equation 26), we set @, = k4/gyh, in this simulation to remove wave dispersion. Other 2 parameters are the same as those in Figure C2. =
