# Page 1

Geoelectric fields and  geomagnetically induced currents  during the April 23–24, 2023  geomagnetic storm  Anna   Wawrzaszek 1  , Rajkumar   Hajra 2 , Agnieszka   Gil 1,3 , Renata   Modzelewska 3 ,  Bruce Tsatnam   Tsurutani 4   & Roman   Wawrzaszek 1  We present a study on the dynamical variations of geoelectric fields   E   during the intense geomagnetic  storm of April 23–24, 2023. The storm is caused by the interplanetary counterpart of a coronal mass  ejection erupted from the Sun in association with an M1.7 X-ray flare. The GeoElectric Dynamic  Mapping (GEDMap) code is applied to develop spatial   E   maps using magnetometer data from 29  observatories distributed across northern Europe. The code has been applied during local nighttime  and morningtime intense substorms which occurred during the storm main phase. The maps show  intensifications and strong variability of the   E -fields during the substorm events. In particular, the  morningtime event is associated with a significant variability in the   E -field direction. Using the  computed   E -fields, we determined geomagnetically induced currents (GICs) at the sub-auroral  station Mäntsälä. The modeled GIC values exhibit significant correlation (correlation coefficients  r   = 0 . 73   −   0 . 76 ) with the observed values. The performed   E -field mapping provides a basis for the  further determination of GICs in selected locations not covered by magnetometers and can be useful in  understanding the GIC variability during magnetic storms and substorms.  Keywords   Geomagnetic storm, Geoelectric field, GICs  The purpose of this work is to develop maps of the geoelectric field E of the north European region during the  intense geomagnetic storm of April 23–24, 2023. Intense geomagnetic storms are caused by solar transients  characterized by high-speed plasma and southward interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) component   B z .  Magnetic reconnection 1   between   B z   and northward magnetopause geomagnetic fields leads to injection of solar  wind kinetic energy into the magnetosphere 2 – 4 . This in turn causes global-scale disturbances of the geomagnetic  fields, known as geomagnetic storms 5 , 6 . In particular, rapid changes in the geomagnetic fields induce local small-  scale geoelectric fields. Close to the auroral zone ( ∼   65 ◦   to   70 ◦   magnetic latitude), E-fields have been shown  to be related to the auroral electrojet movements/intensification, Pi5 pulsations and field-aligned precipitation  events 7 – 10 . In some locations, E-fields can be dependent on the Earth’s conductivity and its variations 11 – 14 . One  of the most important consequences of exceptional high levels of E-fields is the occurrences of geomagnetically  induced currents (GICs) 15 – 18 . GICs are particularly dangerous for ground-based electrical infrastructures and  the possibility of grid failures 19 – 21 .  The April 23–24, 2023 storm with a peak SYM-H of   − 233   nT is the second strongest storm of the current  solar cycle (starting during December 2019) prior to the more recent May 10–11, 2024 superstorm (SYM-H peak  =   − 518   nT) 22 . It is also comparable in strength with the strongest storm of previous solar cycle 24 (with SYM-H  =   − 234   nT on March 17–18, 2015). Hajra et al. 23   presented a detailed study on the solar and interplanetary  causes of the April 23–24, 2023 storm. A recent study by Despirak et al. 24   reported strong GICs in north-west  Russian and south Finnish regions during both local morning and nighttime sectors during the storm. During  the peak phase of this storm, GIC monitoring equipment installed at five transformer substations in Canada  indicated GICs up to 117 A, as reported by Cordell et al. 14 . They proposed the first DC-equivalent network  model for the Alberta province electric system with modeled GIC values. The largest computed values of E-field,  for that region, appeared between 02:30 UT and 07:20 UT of April, 24, being at the level of 300 mV   km − 1 14 .  1 Space Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences (CBK PAN),   Warsaw, Poland.   2 CAS Key Laboratory of Geospace  Environment, School of Earth and Space Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, People’s  Republic of China.   3 University of Siedlce, Faculty of Exact and Natural Sciences, Institute of Mathematics, Siedlce,  Poland.   4 Retired, Pasadena, CA, USA.    email: anna.wawrzaszek@cbk.waw.pl OPEN  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   1 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports

# Page 2

In the present work, we will use a large number of high time resolution magnetometer data from the  International Monitor for Auroral Geomagnetic Effects (IMAGE;   http://space.fmi.fi/image/ ) network to compute  E-field maps for northern Europe to study the stormtime dynamics. The prepared maps will allow systematic  studies of the spatio-temporal evolution of E-fields (their magnitudes and directions) and their relationships to  the interplanetary conditions. The deduced E-fields will then be used for the reconstruction of GICs at Mäntsälä  (Geomagnetic latitude:   57 . 29 ◦   N, longitude:   102 . 05 ◦   E; Geographic latitude:   60 . 6 ◦   N, longitude:   25 . 2 ◦   E 25 – 27 ),  situated in the sub-auroral region. Constructions of the E-field maps in northern Europe could support the  determination of GICs in selected locations not covered by magnetometers and provide a basis for comparison  with similar events 8 . This study will be helpful to understand the GIC variability during the superstorms and to  assess the impacts of the superstorms.  Data and methods  Estimation of geoelectric fields  The E-fields are computed from the geomagnetic fields   B   measured by 29 magnetometers distributed over  northern Europe (from   47 . 14 ◦   to   66 . 64 ◦   geomagnetic latitudes; from   51 . 45 ◦   to   69 . 76 ◦   geographic latitudes), which  are parts of the IMAGE network. We considered data from the stations with suitable conductivity/resistivity  models and data resolution of 10 seconds. Table   1   lists details of the stations, their geographic latitudes and  longitudes, their Corrected Geomagnetic Coordinates (CGM), and the conductivity/resistivity model numbers.  The method is briefly described below.  The perturbed   B -field is assumed to be a vertically incident plane wave at the Earth’s surface (plane wave  method) and simplified models are applied for the Earth’s resistivity/conductivity   28 , 29 . While the Earth’s  conductivity   σ   varies in all directions, the most-significant variation is assumed to be with the depth 29 .  The Earth is represented by a 1D layered model 29 , 30 , in the frame of which   N   layers are specified, each defined  by its own conductivity   σ   n   and thickness   l   n   ( n   = 1 , ..., N   ). Then, layered case of the transfer function   K   (in the  frequency domain   f ) is expressed by the following recursive formula 29 , 31 :  Station code   Station name   Geographic lat   Geographic lon   CGM lat   CGM lon   Conductivity model  [ ◦ ]   [ ◦ ]   [ ◦ ]   [ ◦ ]   [#]  KEV   Kevo   69.76   27.01   66.32   109.24   26  TRO   Tromsø   69.66   18.94   66.64   102.9   26  MAS   Masi   69.46   23.7   66.18   106.42   26  AND   Andenes   69.3   16.03   66.45   100.37   25  IVA   Ivalo   68.56   27.29   65.1   108.57   26  ABK   Abisko   68.35   18.82   65.3   101.75   26  KIR   Kiruna   67.84   20.42   64.69   102.64   26  RST   Röst   67.52   12.09   64.88   95.9   25  SOD   Sodankylä   67.37   26.63   63.92   107.26   24  PEL   Pello   66.9   24.08   63.55   104.92   26  JCK   Jäckvik   66.4   16.98   63.51   98.31   26  DON   Dönna   66.11   12.5   63.38   95.23   25  RAN   Ranua   65.9   26.41   62.09   105.91   24  RVK   Rørvik   64.94   10.98   62.23   93.31   25  LYC   Lycksele   64.61   18.75   61.44   99.29   25  OUJ   Oulujärvi   64.52   27.23   60.99   106.14   24  MEK   Mekrijärvi   62.77   30.97   59.1   108.45   24  HAN   Hankasalmi   62.25   26.6   58.69   104.54   25  DOB   Dombås   62.07   9.11   59.29   90.2   24  SOL   Solund   61.08   4.84   58.53   86.26   24  NUR   Nurmijärvi   60.5   24.65   56.89   102.18   25  UPS   Uppsala   59.9   17.35   56.51   95.84   24  KAR   Karmøy   59.21   5.24   56.43   85.67   24  TAR   Tartu   58.26   26.46   54.47   102.89   41  BRZ   Birzai   56.17   24.86   52.3   100.81   1  SUW   Suwałki   54.01   23.18   49.97   98.7   40  WNG   Wingst   53.74   9.07   50.01   86.65   12  NGK   Niemegk   52.07   12.68   47.96   89.13   14  PPN   Polesie   51.45   23.13   47.14   97.99   9  Table 1 .   The summary of magnetometer stations with 10 sec resolution data used to calculate the geoelectric  field.  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   2 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports/

# Page 3

K n   =   η n K   n +1 (1 +   e − 2 k n l n ) +   η   n (1   −   e − 2 k n l n )  K   n +1 (1   −   e − 2 k n l n ) +   η   n (1 +   e − 2 k n l n ) ,   (1)  where   K   n   denotes the ratio of   E   to   B   at the top surface of layer   n , while   K   n +1   at the top surface of the underlying  layer   n   + 1 ,   η n   =   i 2 πf  k n   ,   k   n   =   √ i 2 πf μ 0 σ   n   and   μ 0   = 4 π 10 − 7 H − 1 m 28 .  The initial value in Eq. ( 1 ) corresponds to the case when the layer   n   =   N   is a uniform half-space and  K N   =  √  i 2 πf μ 0 σ   N .   (2)  The final value   K 1   ( n   = 1 ) is the transfer function relating   E   and   B   at the Earth’s surface 28 , 32 .  In this work, to perform analysis of data from 29 stations located at different latitudes and longitudes, we applied  various 1D Earth resistivity models (EURHOM 1D) dedicated to the European region, as listed in Table   1   and  described in details in Ádám et al. 33 . These models vary in the number of layers, values of thicknesses ( l ), and  resistivities ( 1 /σ ), and correspond to local conditions around the observatory stations.  The Earth’s internal structure can exhibit a complex 3D distribution of electrical resistivity. Various studies 34 , 35  have shown, however, that a 1D model remains a valuable first-order approximation for modeling the general  resistivity structure and its impact on surface electric fields. Additionally, the 1D model is both fast and accurate  at a specific location 36 , which is relevant for this study.  The choice and application of a given Earth resistivity model influences the transfer function   K   between the  B - and   E -fields. In the primary step of the   E -field estimation, the geomagnetic field   { B X , B Y }   is decomposed into  its frequency components   { B X ( f   ) , B Y ( f   ) } . Then, they are multiplied by the corresponding transfer function  values, that is  E X ( f   ) =   K ( f   ) B Y ( f   )  E Y ( f   ) =   − K ( f   ) B X ( f   ) ,   (3)  where   E X ( f   )   and   E Y ( f   )   stand for the E-field frequency components. In the final step, the inverse Fourier  transform is applied to determine the E-field values in the time domain [ E ( t )] for the northward   [ E X ]   and  eastward   [ E Y ]   components 29 , 37 .  GeoElectric Dynamic Mapping  GeoElectric Dynamic Mapping (GEDMap) 8   provides a robust construction of spatial maps of E-fields and  allows determination of very rapid and strong variability of E-fields, and thus the extremely localized peak  enhancements. More precisely, (i) the GEDMap procedure keeps the time resolution of input E-field time series;  (ii) it applies 1D layered conductivity Earth models and determines E-fields at the positions of the magnetometers;  (iii) it allows to select one of the four mathematical methods of 2D interpolation (the nearest neighbor, the linear  interpolation, the cubic spline interpolation 38   and the natural neighbor interpolation 39 ); (iv) it constructs   E  maps with a grid of   0 . 05 ◦   (latitude) × 0 . 2 ◦   (longitude) spatial scale resolution. The final output of the GEDMap  procedure state maps, which presents the magnitude of the modeled E-field   E   =   √ E 2  X   +   E 2  Y   or both local  direction and the magnitude of E-field 8 . It should be noted that the selection of interpolation methods in the  preparation of E-field maps is an important step, and should be validated each time when a new space weather  Figure 1 .   Correlation coefficients between   E   determined in measurement point and   E   obtained as a result of  interpolation performed by using nearest neighbor (green line), linear (blue line), cubic spline (black line) and  natural neighbor (red line) techniques. The 19 stations indicated on the x-axis were considered as verification  points and ordered by decreasing geographic latitude (Table   1 ).  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   3 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports/

# Page 4

event with a varying number of high time resolution magnetic field data is considered 8 . Therefore, during the  analysis of real data recorded by a station at a specific location, the data were compared with an interpolated  value calculated for the same location, but excluding that station from the set of known data points during the  interpolation. Figure   1   shows the correlation values between   E   measured at 19 of the 29 stations listed in Table  1   (indicated on the x-axis) and those interpolated using nearest neighbor (green line), linear (blue line), cubic  spline (black line), and natural neighbor interpolation (red line). The correlation was calculated using 10-second  resolution data from 12:00 UT on April 23 to 12:00 UT on April 24, 2023. Moreover, 19 stations considered as  verification points and indicated on x-axis have been ordered with decreasing geographic latitudes (Table   1 ).  Figure   1   reveals the varying levels of effectiveness among the interpolation methods, which directly depend  on the specific stations considered. Verification of interpolation quality has been performed by regression  analysis between the time series measured in a given station and the time series interpolated for the same  location. In this procedure, interpolation was performed with excluding the subject station from the data set. The  lowest correlation coefficient between the measured and interpolated   E   values occurs when the nearest neighbor  interpolation method is used (green line) with the mean correlation coefficient of 0.79. For the other three  methods, the mean correlation is above 0.80 (linear: 0.87, cubic spline: 0.86, and natural neighbor: 0.89), and in  general is close to 0.90 for first 10 stations located at higher geographic latitudes, from   69 . 46 ◦   (MAS) to   64 . 94 ◦  (RVK) (from   66 . 18 ◦   to   62 . 23 ◦   magnetic latitude). When latitudes decrease, the correlations decrease (sparsely  distributed magnetometers), while the lowest correlations are observed for the UPS station. It is noteworthy that  the distance to the nearest station for UPS is the greatest, around 440 km.  As suggested by Fig.   1 , the natural neighbor interpolation method (red line) appears to be the most effective,  showing the highest correlation between the measured and interpolated   E   values for most of the considered  stations. It worth adding that the same interpolation method has been applied by Wawrzaszek et al. 8   to study the  September 7–8, 2017 geomagnetic storm 36 , 40 , 41 . Moreover, the natural neighbor interpolation does not require  any statistical assumptions and parameters, it produces a continuous surface without discontinuities, and is  suitable for small datasets 42 . Therefore, the natural neighbor method has been applied in this present work.  High-resolution (1-min) near-Earth solar-wind plasma and IMF data analyzed in this work are taken from  NASA’s OMNIWeb ( https://omniweb.gsfc.nasa.gov/ ). Substorm activity is studied using the SuperMAG SML  index ( https://supermag.jhuapl.edu/ ) 43 , 44 . GICs at Mäntsälä are collected from the Finnish Meteorological  Institute ( https://space.fmi.fi/gic/ ).  Results  Solar and geomagnetic conditions  The near-Earth solar wind, interplanetary and geomagnetic conditions during April 23–25, 2023 are shown  in Fig.   2 . A gradual decrease in the geomagnetic SYM-H index from a value of   ∼   0   nT at 09:00 UT on April  23 marks the geomagnetic storm main phase onset (Fig.   2 f). It is preceded by a southward turning of IMF  B z   component at   ∼ 07:54 UT (Fig.   2 e). This is followed by an almost steady southward IMF component   B   s   of  ∼   11   nT.  B   s   further intensifies to   ∼   25 nT at   ∼ 19:13UT on April 23 during an interplanetary sheath (compressed plasma  and IMFs 45 , 46 ; marked by a red horizontal bar at the top) by impingement of an interplanetary discontinuity at  ∼ 17:35 UT (marked by a dashed vertical line). The discontinuity is characterized by sharp and simultaneous  increases in the solar wind proton speed   V p   ( ∼   358   to   ∼   495   km   s − 1 , Fig.   2 a), density   N p   ( ∼   5 . 7   to   ∼   16 . 7   cm − 3 ,  Fig.   2 c), ram pressure   P sw   ( ∼   1 . 2   to   ∼   8 . 0   nPa, Fig.   2 c), temperature   T p   ( ∼   1 . 7   ×   10 4   to   ∼   25 . 2   ×   10 4   K, Fig.   2 d,  black), and IMF magnitude   B 0   ( ∼   10 . 3   to   ∼   25 . 2   nT, Fig.   2 e). From an analysis of high-resolution plasma and  IMF data collected by the Wind spacecraft through the mixed-mode discontinuity normal analysis 47   and the  application of the Rankine-Hugoniot 48 – 50   conservation laws, the discontinuity (identified at 16:58 UT at the  spacecraft location,   ∼   200   Earth radii upstream from the center of the Earth) is found to be a fast-forward (FF)  shock with a magnetosonic Mach number   M ms   of   ∼   2 . 7 , moving at a speed   V sh   of   ∼   247   km   s − 1   (relative to the  upstream solar wind) at an angle   θ B n   of   ∼   81 ◦   with respect to the ambient IMF 23 .  Following this quasi-perpendicular shock, the sheath   B s   caused a major decrease in the SYM-H index to  − 179   nT at 21:59 UT on April 23. This first storm main phase development is associated with multiple intense  substorms, as indicated by the auroral SML index peaks of   − 1311   nT ( ∼ 11:21 UT),   − 1213   nT ( ∼ 16:46 UT),  − 1406   nT ( ∼ 17:48 UT),   − 1608   nT ( ∼ 18:45 UT),   − 1570   nT ( ∼ 19:45 UT),   − 2018   nT ( ∼ 20:20 UT), and   − 1660   nT  ( ∼ 21:37 UT on April 23) (Fig.   2 f). The northward turning of IMF at   ∼ 21:03 UT (on April 23) resulted in  significant reduction in substorm occurrences.  The interplanetary sheath is followed by a classical interplanetary flux-rope magnetic cloud (MC 51 – 53 )  structure from   ∼ 01:17 UT up to   ∼ 22:11 UT on April 24 (marked by a green bar at the top and a vertical gray  shading). A sharp north-to-southward turning in IMF   B z   (with simultaneous polarity changes in   B x   and   B y ) is  followed by slow and smooth polarity rotations in the IMF components and slowly decreasing IMF   B 0   (Fig.   2 e).  The MC is characterized by a rarefied density ( N p   ∼   0 . 2   −   2 . 6   cm − 3 ) and cold ( T p   ∼   1 . 5   ×   10 4   K) plasma with  low   β   ( ∼   0 . 01 ). The MC has a south-to-north magnetic component configuration, with a peak   B s   of   ∼   33   nT  at   ∼ 01:21 UT on April 24. This   B s   led to the major second-step development of the storm main phase, SYM-H  reaching   − 233   nT at 04:03 UT on April 24 (Fig.   2 f). This SYM-H peak is associated with a supersubstorm (SSS,  defined by an SML peak   <   − 2500   nT 54 , 55 ) with an SML peak of   − 2760   nT ( ∼ 03:54 UT on April 24). Thus, the  double-peak storm main phase is attributed to a combined effect of an interplanetary sheath and an MC. The  sheath and MC   B s   components cause magnetic reconnection 1   with the Earth’s (dayside) northward magnetic  field, leading to the solar wind energy input into the magnetosphere during geomagnetic storms (see empirical  verification of this mechanism for substorms by Tsurutani and Meng 56 , and for magnetic storms by Tsurutani  et al. 46   and Echer et al. 4 ). The storm gradually recovered to a “quiet” value of   − 41   nT at 22:44 UT on April 24.  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   4 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports/

# Page 5

Inside the MC, low   N p   lead to low Alfvén Mach number   M A   of   ∼   0 . 5   at   ∼ 12:48 UT on April 24 (Fig.   2 b).  The   ∼   2 . 1 -h long (from   ∼ 12:25 UT to   ∼ 14:33 UT on April 24, marked by a light-cyan shading) sub-Alfvénic  ( M A   <   1 ) solar wind corresponds to the recovery phase of the magnetic storm, and did not cause any  significant geomagnetic storm ring current enhancement. However, the sub-Alfvénic interval is associated with  disappearance of auroral substorms (Fig.   2 f).  The near-Earth solar wind data (Fig.   2 a–e) described above represent the interplanetary counterpart of a  coronal mass ejection (CME) or an interplanetary-CME (ICME). The fast CME ejected with a linear speed of  ∼   1284   km   s − 1   from the Sun (source location:   22 ◦   S latitude,   11 ◦   W longitude) at   ∼ 18:12 UT on April 21. It was  associated with an M1.7 X-ray flare erupted (at   ∼ 17:44 UT) from the solar active region AR3282.  Figure   2 g presents the GIC measurements at a gas pipeline near Mäntsälä, Finland ( 60 . 6 ◦   N geographic  latitude,   25 . 2 ◦   E geographic longitude). It shows several strong GICs. In particular, there are several intervals on  April 23, where the GIC peaks (|GIC|) were   >   20   A, e.g., from 19:03:40 to 19:04:00 UT (27.32 A), from 19:04:40  to 19:04:50 UT (25.75 A), from 19:31:40 to 19:32:40 UT (27.17 A), from 19:38:20 to 19:38:40 UT (22.72 A), from  19:39:40 to 19:40:00 UT (22.25 A), from 19:45:20 to 19:45:50 UT (21.73 A), and at 20:04:20 UT (20.65 A). The  maximum value of GIC on April 23 (27.32 A) was registered at 19:03:50 UT. On April 24, GIC peaks   >   20   A were  observed from 03:52:50 to 03:53:40 UT (20.82 A), from 03:56:00 to 03:57:00 UT (35.22 A), and from 03:57:30 to  04:00:00 UT (34.18 A), with the strongest values ( ∼ − 35   A) at 03:56:40 and 03:58:40 UT. From these multiple  GIC activities, we have selected two events for further systematic studies: GIC peak   =   13.97 A at 19:44:00 UT  on April 23 (Event I), and GIC peak   =   18.25 A at 03:54:20 UT on April 24 (Event II). These are marked by red  vertical dotted lines in Fig.   2 . They correspond to an intense substorm (with the SML peak of   − 1570   nT at   ∼  19:45 UT on April 23), and the SSS (with the SML peak of   − 2760   nT at   ∼ 03:54 UT on April 24), respectively.  According to Despirak et al. 24 , Event I is a part of local nighttime GICs consistent with a poleward expansion  of the substorm-related westward electrojet currents, while Event 2 occurring during local morning sector was  suggested to be led by Ps6 magnetic pulsations caused by a high-density solar wind. Thus the events are suitable  selections to understand the   E -field dynamics dependence on varying local times and interplanetary conditions.  Temporal and spatial variability of geoelectric field  Figure   3   shows the magnitudes of the computed E-fields   E   =   √ E 2  X   +   E 2  Y   between 12:00 UT on April 23 and  12:00 UT on April 24 for five selected stations: SOL, DOB, UPS, NUR, and TAR. These stations are located at  Figure 2 .   Solar wind plasma and interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) during the intense storm of April, 2023.  From top to bottom, the panels show: ( a ) solar wind proton speed   V p , ( b ) Alfvén Mach number   M A , the  horizontal dashed line indicating   M A   = 1 , ( c ) proton density   N p   (black, legend on the left) and ram pressure  P sw   (red, legend on the right), ( d ) proton temperature   T p   (black, legend on the left) and plasma- β   (red, legend  on the right), ( e ) IMF magnitude   B 0 ,   B x ,   B y   and   B z   components, ( f ) the geomagnetic SYM-H index  (black, legend on the left) and the auroral SML index (red, legend on the right), ( g ) geomagnetically induced  current (GIC) at the Mäntsälä during April 23–25. The black vertical dashed line shows a fast-forward (FF)  interplanetary shock. The red vertical dotted lines indicate selected GIC events. The red bar at the top indicates  an interplanetary sheath. The green bar at the top and the vertical gray shading both indicate a magnetic cloud  (MC). The light-cyan shading inside the MC shows a sub-Alfvénic solar wind interval with   M A   <   1 . This  figure is adapted from Hajra et al. 23 .  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   5 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports/

# Page 6

similar geographic latitudes, around   60 ◦ , and at varied longitudes, from   4 . 84 ◦   (SOL) to   24 . 46 ◦   (TAR) (see Table   1 ).  Note that the y-axis ranges for panels (a) and (b) are twice those for panels (c)–(e). Higher   E   fluctuations start  before 18:00 UT, while the strongest increases in   E   are observed around Event I (at 19:44:00 UT) and Event II (at  03:54:20 UT), marked by red vertical dashed lines. The increases are highest at SOL (Fig.   3 a) and DOB (Fig.   3 b).  In particular, at these two stations strong   E   peaks, significantly higher than 500 mV   km − 1 , are observed before  Event I (around 19:00 UT), while stronger   E   peaks of   ∼   1800   mV   km − 1   (at SOL) and   ∼   3000   mV   km − 1   (at DOB)  coincide with the Event II timing.  Figure 3 .   Computed geoelectric field   E   during the April 23–24, 2023 storm event for five selected stations:  SOL ( a ), DOB ( b ), UPS ( c ), NUR ( d ), and TAR ( e ). For comparison, Mäntsälä GIC (black, legend on the left)  and SML index (red, legend on the right) in panel f have been shown. Event I and II are marked by red vertical  dashed lines.  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   6 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports/

# Page 7

In general, Fig.   3   confirms the expected higher level of the   E- field for Event II associated with the SSS compared  to that for Event I associated with a weaker substorm (see Fig.   2 ). It is worth noting that the determined   E- field  for station NUR, located around 40 km away from Mäntsälä, is particularly large, 793.7 mV   km − 1   (at 19:03 UT),  the largest recorded value occurring before Event I (Fig.   3 d).Figures   4   and   5   present the variations of   E   with  latitude during two intervals around the two events, from 16:00 to 23:00 UT on April 23 (Fig.   4 ) and from 00:00  to 08:00 UT on April 24 (Fig.   5 ), respectively. Seven stations: MAS, IVA, SOD, RAN, OUJ, MEK and HAN have  been selected to cover a latitude range from   69 . 46 ◦   (MAS) to   62 . 25 ◦   (HAN). Interestingly, around the time of  the FF shock impact ( ∼ 17:35 UT on April 23, Fig   2 ), higher   E   fluctuations are observed at the high latitude  stations (Fig.   4 a–e) compared to the lower latitude stations (Fig.   4 f–g). Figure   6   shows 10 s values of   B X   and  Figure 4 .   Geoelectric field   E   during the April 23, 2023 storm event (from 16:00 to 23:00 UT) for seven selected  stations: MAS ( a ), IVA ( b ), SOD ( c ), RAN ( d ), OUJ ( e ), MEK ( f ) and HAN ( g ). For comparison, Mäntsälä GIC  (black, legend on the left) and SML index (red, legend on the right) in panel h have been shown. Event I is  represented by a red dashed line, while a black vertical dashed line marks the time of the shock.  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   7 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports/

# Page 8

B Y   at the same stations considered in Fig.   4 . The FF shock is marked by a vertical black dashed line. The IMF  B z   component was southward prior to the shock, the shock intensified it and increased the energy input into  the magnetosphere (see Fig.   2 ). This also started the magnetic storm main phase with a series of substorms.  Although shocks typically cause large geomagnetic field increases at near equatorial and midlatitude locations,  the effects at the high latitude stations is much weaker. In Fig.   6 , stations MAS, IVA, SOD, RAN and OUJ show  ∼   200   nT deviations, and stations MEK and HAN show very little magnetic deviations.  Figure 5 .   Geoelectric field   E   during the April 24, 2023 storm event (from 00:00 to 08:00 UT) for seven selected  stations: MAS ( a ), IVA ( b ), SOD ( c ), RAN ( d ), OUJ ( e ), MEK ( f ) and HAN ( g ). For comparison, Mäntsälä GIC  (black, legend on the left) and SML index (red, legend on the right) in panel h have been shown. Event II is  denoted by red dashed line.  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   8 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports/

# Page 9

Event I at 19:44:00   UT on April 23  Figure   7   shows the computed   E   magnitude and direction maps at three time intervals during Event I. The  measured GICs at Mäntsälä and SML index are shown at the top for context. The three intervals of maps are  shown, marked by red circles in the top panel.  At 19:38:40 UT, the   E -field structures are found to move roughly from West-North to South (Fig   7 a, middle  and lower panels). In the most parts of the map, the direction of the field is from West to East. Changes occur  mostly at the edges of the map. Some of these changes may not necessarily be a physical effect, but a numerical  one.  At 19:44:00 UT, the moment with extreme SML value, the highest values of   E -field were observed near the  Arctic Circle, as well as around the Norwegian magnetometer in Dombås (Fig.   7 b, middle and lower panels).  One can also observe, that moving structures were inhomogeneous during that time, e.g.,   E   around Polish  station in Suwałki was stronger than in much more northern locations.  At 19:45:30 UT, i.e., after the time when SML index reached its local minimum, the image of the electric  field in the northern end of the analyzed area began to become significantly distorted (Fig.   7 c, middle and lower  panels).  As reported by Despirak et al. 24 , GIC increases occurred during a substorm, with a poleward development of  the westward electrojet. At that time the GIC measured at Mäntsälä was 13.97 A, although the local maximum  was at 19:03:50 UT, with the value of 27.32 A. It can be noted that it perfectly matches the time of the largest  increase that can be observed in the changes of the computed   E -field, for Nurmijarvi (Fig.   3 d). The estimated  value of   E   is 793.7 mV   km − 1 . One may also observe, that the peak value of the   E   field in the vicinity of Event I  occurred at different times at different stations. This is in contrast to Event II, whose peak occurred at the same  time at all observatories (Fig.   3 ).  Other, continuously available measurements of GICs are more east comparing to Mäntsälä. Around Event I,  measurements at Vykhodnoy station (VKH,   68 . 83 ◦ N,   33 . 08 ◦ E), showed that at approximately 17:30 UT (around  the time of the first substorm onset, compare with Fig. 2 in Despirak et al. 24 ) there was the first strong oscillation  in the GIC values, between   ∼   +20   and   − 30   A. Another peak was observed just after 20:00 UT with a value  exceeding 25 A. It can be noted that the   E -field computed for the magnetometer located at similar geographic  latitude in Masi (MAS, Table   1 , Fig.   4 a), reached the maximum value of 915.7 mV   km − 1 , at the same time, i.e.  around the second substorm onset (see Fig. 2 in Despirak et al. 24 ). Our animation included in the Supplementary  Information (Supplementary Video   S1 ) shows that before 20:00 UT, the direction of the computed   E   for MAS  changes its direction from South-West to North. The highest values on April 23 were recorded after 20:00 UT.  GIC ranged between almost 40 A and   − 40   A. Looking more South, GIC data from Kondopoga (KND,   62 . 22 ◦  N,   34 . 36 ◦ E, Polar Geophysical Institute) show less rapid changes on April 23, with the highest value of   ∼   15   A,  around 19:30 UT. Figure   4 f shows that   E   at a similar geographic latitude, Mekrijärvi (MEK, see Table   1 ) reached  Figure 6 .   Geomagnetic field components   B X   ( a ) and   B Y   ( b ) measured during the April 23, 2023 storm event  (from 16:00 to 23:00 UT) at selected stations: MAS, IVA, SOD, RAN, OUJ, MEK and HAN. The dashed vertical  black line is the shock arrival time ( ∼   17:35 UT), the Event I is represented by a red dashed line.  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   9 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports/

# Page 10

the maximum value of 991.4 mV   km − 1   exactly at the same time. The animation   S1   displays that after 19:30 UT,   E  around MEK is directed towards East. Moreover, Fig.   3   and animation   S1   reveal an interesting temporal feature  of the April 23–24 storm as follows. The more south the magnetometer is located (e.g., NUR and TAR, both  operated by Finnish Meteorological Institute), the associated   E -field values were stronger during Event I in  comparison to Event II.  Event I was chosen deliberately, as an example where the power of changes in the values of the geomagnetic  indices and GIC is weaker compared to Event II (Figs.   7   and   8 , middle and lower panels). This is the moment  when during the substorm phase the local maximum of the SML-index value appeared. These lower values  indicate that it is expected that the changes in the   E -field maps will be more subtle – and this is exactly what  they are.  Event II at 03:54:20   UT on April 24  The second animation of maps included in the Supplementary Information (Supplementary Video   S2 ) presents  the temporal and spatial variations of computed   E -field around Event II, from 03:52 to 04:02 UT on April 24.  Figure 7 .   (top) GICs at Mäntsälä (black, legend on the left) and the SML index (red, legend on the right)  around Event I. Three intervals/times are denoted by red circles, marked as ( a – c ). (middle)   E   magnitude  maps corresponding to ( a – c ). (bottom)   E   direction maps corresponding to ( a – c ). Color bars at the right  show   E   magnitudes (mV   km − 1 ) in log scale. Black dots on maps indicate geographic location of the IMAGE  magnetometer stations (see Table   1 ) used for this analysis. For comparison, the Mäntsälä station location has  also been denoted and highlighted by a red dot.  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   10 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports/

# Page 11

Figure   8   presents GIC measurements at Mäntsälä and SML index (top panel) and the three selected maps of the  E -field magnitude (middle panel) and direction (bottom panel) at 03:54:00 UT, 03:56:40 UT, and 03:58:40 UT.  The first stage of the animation beginning from 03:52 UT shows the quasi-stable conditions of GICs (at  Mäntsälä), a flat line of GICs at about 20 A. However, the corresponding   E -field increases from   ∼   63 ◦   to   69 ◦   N.  During   ∼ 03:53–04:00 UT, the   E -field is found to be strong at almost all IMAGE stations, seems to be  associated with the strongest GIC of   − 35 . 22   A recorded at Mäntsälä at 03:56:40 UT on April 24. This is in  good agreement with Despirak et al. 24   reporting strong GICs on several substations of Karelian-Kola power line  (located at north-west Russia). The   E -field is found to be eastward at   ∼ 03:53–03:55 UT. However, a mixture of  directions is found to develop from   ∼ 03:56 UT, when GIC exhibits a rapid decrease from   ∼   +20   to   ∼ − 30   A  at Mäntsälä. In addition, the GIC “recovery” is found to be associated with dominantly westward   E -field at   ∼  03:58 UT.  The extreme values of the SML index are accompanied with the highest values of the   E -field at SOL, DOB,  UPS, NUR and TAR (Fig.   3 ) situated alongside the whole longitudes of the analyzed area at   ∼   58   −   63 ◦   latitude  (Fig.   8 ). In a clear contrast, the   E -field at MAS, IVA, SOD and RAN (Fig.   5 ) at the latitude survey do not show  exactly the pick values at the moment of the Event II, but a bit earlier and later times, which is in agreement with  the strongest GIC observations at Vykhodnoy 24 . However at the stations MEK and HAN (Figs.   5   and   8 ) extreme  values of   E   are coincident with the Event II. This is in a good agreement with the large GIC values observed at  Kondopoga 24 .   E -fields at all the stations (MAS, IVA, SOD, RAN, OUJ, MEK and HAN) (Fig.   5 ) show evident  oscillations with period   ∼   30   min, consistent with magnetic pulsations, as reported by Despirak at al. 24 , however,  less visible towards lower latitudes.  Figure 8 .   Same as in Fig.   7 , but for Event II.  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   11 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports/

# Page 12

Thus, Event II was related to the local substorm-like intensification with intense magnetic pulsations in the  IMAGE magnetometers as well as at magnetometers located in the Siberia, the Urals and in the Karelia regions 24 .  Despirak at al. 24   suggested that “such local substorm-like intensifications may be caused by solar wind pressure  pulses such as interplanetary shocks 57   and plasma parcels 54 ”.  GIC estimation  Estimating the   E -field induced at the Earth’s surface is essential for the analysis of GICs. There are various  approaches to the GIC modeling, taking into account the non-uniform lateral conductivity distribution 58 . To  properly estimate GICs, many factors must be taken into account, such as the strength of the geomagnetic  field disturbance, surface impedance, and network topology 14 . In this work, based on the determined   E   values  over MAN, the GIC modeling with a 10-second resolution was performed using a simple formula for laterally  uniform conductivity distribution:   GIC   =   a   ·   E X   +   b   ·   E Y , where   E X , and   E Y   are the local   E -field components.  Values of   a   and   b   are conditioned by the power grid parameters: the resistances or the network topology 25 . For  Mäntsälä, we used   a   =   − 70 . 0   A km   V − 1   and   b   = 88 . 0   A km   V − 1 26 . The same values of of   a   and   b   were recently  Figure 9 .   GICs measured (red) and modeled based on the   E -field (black) along the Finnish natural gas  pipeline at the Mäntsälä station. Event I and Event II are marked by red vertical dashed lines.  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   12 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports/

# Page 13

used in the GIC computations 8 , 13 , 40   showing that the modelled values of the largest GICs amplitudes, as well as  their timing match well with the GICs measured in Mäntsälä.  Figure   9   shows the measured (red) and reproduced (black) GIC values in Mäntsälä. The correlation coefficient  between these two quantities, determined for period from 16:00 UT to 23:00 UT on April 23 (Fig.   9 a) is   ∼   0 . 73  . As can be seen from Fig.   9 a, the modeled GIC values present two strong peaks before Event I (marked by  a vertical red dashed line). More precisely, the first peak reflects the intensification in the   E -field, right after  19:03 UT, as seen in Figs.   3   and   4   and discussed above. However, the value of modeled GIC is much higher  ( ∼   50   A) than the measured GIC ( ∼   27   A). In the light of the discussion by Oliveira et al. 59 , it worth underlying  that the moment of appearance of this GIC   >   20   A is   ∼   1 . 5   h after the interplanetary shock (Fig.   2 , dashed  vertical line). The second peak observed in the modeled GIC ( ∼ − 30   A) around 19:32 UT, is not consistent with  the measured value.  For time interval from 00:00 UT to 08:00 UT on April 24 (Fig.   9 b), which contains strong Event II, the  correlation between the measured and reproduced GICs is   ∼   0 . 76 , and in general presents better agreement than  for Event I. Moreover, beside a strong change before 4:00 UT, GIC values are variable but without significant  separate peaks presented in Fig.   9 a. This observation seems to be in the agreement with the   E   analysis performed  in previous sections.  Figure   9 c, which is an enlarged part of Fig.   9 b, shows, however, that the modeled GIC values (with a  maximum value of   ∼   60   A) are significantly higher than the measured GICs just before Event II between   ∼  3:50 and   ∼ 3:54 UT on April 24. For comparison, Despirack et al. 24   reported very strong GICs at VKH ( ∼   45   A)  at   ∼ 3:30–3:50 UT. Cordell et al. 14   showed even higher GICs between   ∼ 2:00 and   ∼ 3:00 UT on April 24,   ∼   118  A at Ellerslie substation ( 53 . 43 ◦   N,   − 113 . 46 ◦   W) and 63.0 A at Keephills ( 53 . 45 ◦   N,   − 114 . 45 ◦   W), located in  Canada. A systematic analysis of subsequent moments of the GIC time series in Fig.   9 b does not indicate similar  discrepancies.  It is worth noting that by applying the same GEDMap procedure, we reproduced the GICs in Mäntsälä during  the geomagnetic storm of September 7–8, 2017, with a much better accuracy 8 . This raises a question about the  reasons for the observed discrepancy for the present storm. Strong and rapid variations in the direction of the  E -fields, as well as the influence of network parameters   a   and   b   on the level of the GICs, could lead to potential  GIC overestimation. Additionally, the slow degradation of the measurement system in Mäntsälä, as recently  suggested by Kruglyakov et al. 58 , could be another explanation. Finally, various studies have confirmed the  usefulness of the 1-D conductivity model in GICs modeling from geomagnetic data 27 , 60 . In particular, Dimmock  et al. 40   showed the lack of significant lateral ground conductivity gradients at Mäntsälä, thus justifying the use  of 1-D models at that location. Moreover, Dimmock et al. 40   carried out 3-D geoelctric field and GIC modeling  in the Fennoscandian region for the September 7–8, 2017 geomagnetic storm. The authors, based on the E-field  values simulated in the SMAP and by using the network parameters   a   and   b   taken from Pulkkinen et al. 26  and considered in this work, performed GIC modeling at Mäntsälä. Their results showed that the modeled  GIC values needed be scaled by a factor of 4 to correspond to the GIC measured at Mäntsälä (see Fig. 12c  in Dimmock et al. 40 ). Marshalko et al. 61   performed 3-D ground E-field modeling in Fennoscandia for three  days of the Halloween geomagnetic storm (October 29–31, 2003) using a 3-D conductivity model of the region  and three three different approaches to source approximation. Their calculations of GIC, based on the E-field  simulated at Mäntsälä, overestimated the measured values by a factor of 4–6 for all modeling techniques and  finally the scaling procedure of modeled GICs by a factor of 4.51 has been applied (see Fig. 10a–c in Marshalko  et al. 61 ). One can speculate that the application of a similar 3-D conductivity model for the April 23–24 storm  may lead to comparable overestimation effects in E-field modeling. However, a comprehensive and independent  analysis is needed. On the other hand, applying an appropriate scaling factor or using other rapidly developing  approaches in 3-D geoelectric field modeling seems to be a promising way to address the discrepancies observed  between measured and modeled GIC during the April 23–24 storm 12 .  Summary and discussion  In the present study, we focused on the analysis of the geoelectric field E over the European region during the  severe geomagnetic storm on April 23-24, 2023. By applying various 1-D Earth resistivity models (EURHOM  1D) and using geomagnetic data from 29 stations located across a wide range of latitudes and longitudes, we  calculated the E-field, which is crucial for analyzing GICs. The E-field mapping was prepared using GEDMap  procedure/code. Two separate events (Event I at 19:44:00 UT on April 23 and Event II at 03:54:20 UT on April  24) were examined. Our results showed that:  •   The very high modeled values of E-field for the European region were identified on April 24, at stations SOL,  DOB with the   E   peaks of   ∼   1800   mV   km − 1   (at SOL) and   ∼   3000   mV   km − 1   (at DOB).  •   The   E -field exhibited strong longitudinal and magnetic latitudinal variability during the geomagnetic storm.  •   The model results indicate that significant E-field disturbances may also occur at lower magnetic latitudes,  well below the auroral zone (e.g. the computed | E | for Oulujärvi was 1425.14 mV   km − 1   at 19:30 UT, while for  the more northern magnetometer in Masi it was much lower value, namely 915.7 mV   km − 1 ).  •   The   E -field direction changed from east to westward in Event II. At the same time the GIC values at Mäntsälä  also reversed, with the positive values before the Event II and negative at the recovery phase.  •   Event II was associated with the local substorm-like intensification with intense magnetic pulsations in the  IMAGE magnetometers as well as at magnetometers located in Siberia, the Urals and in the Karelia region 24 .  Moreover, in the light of the thorough analysis of specific events (Event I and Event II), a few noteworthy  additional observations can be made. During the Event I the highest values of E-field were observed near the  Arctic Circle at the moment when the extreme value of SML index was reached. Event II showed more significant  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   13 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports/

# Page 14

changes, variations, and growth in both   E   and GIC values. Moreover, the consistency in time of these changes  was very high, the extreme values of modelled   E   for various locations, and GIC appeared at practically the same  time, unlike Event I.  In summary, it seems that GICs associated with different processes (expansion of electrojets or intense  magnetic pulsations) are also associated with a different picture of the temporal-spatial change of the E-field.  Moreover, the performed analysis underlines the important role of both the magnitude and direction  of the E-field in understanding of the appearance of significant GICs, suggested in various studies 14 , 40 . The  overestimation of modeled GICs, besides the potential reasons mentioned above, could be the effect of changes in  geoelectric field directions with respect to the Mäntsälä pipeline or/and the existence of preferential orientations  relative to the pipeline that subsequently drove large GICs 40 .  Finally, it is worth mentioning that the scientific community has recently observed an increase in intense  space weather incidents of a strength exceeding the analyzed strong geomagnetic storm of April 23-24, 2023.  Therefore, our current and future work will focus on modeling the E-field during these new events, particularly  the geomagnetic storm that occurred in May 2024. A comparative analysis of the results of this article with the  spatial-temporal distribution of the geoelectric field during other events can shed light on understanding GICs  and their relationship to physical processes.  Data availability  The solar wind plasma and IMF data used in this work are obtained from the OMNI database:   http://cdaweb.  gsfc.nasa.gov/cdaweb/istp_public/ ; the magnetometer data from IMAGE:   http://space.fmi.fi/image/ ; the SML  index from SuperMAG:   https://supermag.jhuapl.edu/ ; and the GIC data from the Finnish Meteorological Insti -  tute:   https://space.fmi.fi/gic/ .  Received: 10 August 2024; Accepted: 14 October 2024  References  1.   Dungey, J. W. Interplanetary magnetic field and the auroral zones.   Phys. Rev. Lett.   6 , 47–48.   https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.6.47  (1961).  2.   Tsurutani, B. T. & Meng, C.-I. Interplanetary magnetic-field variations and substorm activity.   J. Geophys. Res.   77 , 2964–2970.  https://doi.org/10.1029/JA077i016p02964   (1972).  3.   Tsurutani, B. T., Gonzalez, W. D., Tang, F., Akasofu, S. I. & Smith, E. J. Origin of interplanetary southward magnetic fields  responsible for major magnetic storms near solar maximum (1978–1979).   J. Geophys. Res. Sp. Phys.   93 , 8519–8531.   https://doi.  org/10.1029/JA093iA08p08519   (1988).  4.   Echer, E., Gonzalez, W. D., Tsurutani, B. T. & Gonzalez, A. L. C. Interplanetary conditions causing intense geomagnetic storms (dst  ≤   -100 nt) during solar cycle 23 (1996–2006).   J. Geophys. Res. Sp. Phys.   113 .   https://doi.org/10.1029/2007JA012744   (2008).  5.   von Humboldt, A. Die vollständigste aller bisherigen beobachtungen über den einfluss des nordlichts auf die magnetnadel  angestellt.   Ann. Phys.   29 , 425–429.   https://doi.org/10.1002/andp.18080290806   (1808).  6.   Gonzalez, W. D. et al. What is a geomagnetic storm?.   J. Geophys. Res. Sp. Phys.   99 , 5771–5792.   https://doi.org/10.1029/93JA02867  (1994).  7.   Gannon, J., Swidinsky, A. & Xu, Z.   Geomagnetically Induced Currents from the Sun to the Power Grid . Geophysical Monograph  Series (Wiley, 2019).  8.   Wawrzaszek, A., Gil, A., Modzelewska, R., Tsurutani, B. T. & Wawrzaszek, R. Analysis of large geomagnetically induced  currents during the 7–8 September 2017 storm: Geoelectric field mapping.   Space Weather   21 , e2022SW003383.   https://doi.  org/10.1029/2022SW003383   (2023).  9.   Yagova, N. V., Pilipenko, V. A., Sakharov, Y. A. & Selivanov, V. N. Spatial scale of geomagnetic Pc5/Pi3 pulsations as a factor of their  efficiency in generation of geomagnetically induced currents.   Earth Planets Sp.   73 , 88.   https://doi.org/10.1186/s40623-021-01407-2  (2021).  10.   Heyns, M. J., Lotz, S. I. & Gaunt, C. T. Geomagnetic pulsations driving geomagnetically induced currents.   Space Weather   19 ,  e2020SW002557.   https://doi.org/10.1029/2020SW002557   (2021).  11.   Nikitina, L., Trichtchenko, L. & Boteler, D. H. Assessment of extreme values in geomagnetic and geoelectric field variations for  canada.   Space Weather   14 , 481–494.   https://doi.org/10.1002/2016SW001386   (2016).  12.   Kelbert, A. The role of global/regional earth conductivity models in natural geomagnetic hazard mitigation.   Surv. Geophys.   41 ,  115–166.   https://doi.org/10.1007/s10712-019-09579-z   (2020).  13.   Dimmock, A. P. et al. Modeling the geomagnetic response to the September 2017 space weather event over Fennoscandia using the  space weather modeling framework: Studying the impacts of spatial resolution.   Space Weather   19 , e2020SW002683.   https://doi.  org/10.1029/2020SW002683   (2021).  14.   Cordell, D. et al. Modeling geomagnetically induced currents in the Alberta power network: Comparison and validation using  hall probe measurements during a magnetic storm.   Space Weather   22 , e2023SW003813.   https://doi.org/10.1029/2023SW003813  (2024).  15.   Barlow, W. H., Barlow, P. & Culley, R. S. VI. On the spontaneous electrical currents observed in the wires of the electric telegraph.  Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond.   139 , 61–72.   https://doi.org/10.1098/rstl.1849.0006   (1849).  16.   Varley, C. Discussion of a few papers on Earth currents.   J. Soc. Telegr. Eng.   2 , 111–114.   https://doi.org/10.1049/jste-1.1873.0033  (1873).  17.   Campbell, W. H. Observation of electric currents in the Alaska oil pipeline resulting from auroral electrojet current sources.  Geophys. J. Int.   61 , 437–449.   https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-246X.1980.tb04325.x   (1980).  18.   Akasofu, S.-I. & Aspnes, J. D. Auroral effects on power transmission line systems.   Nature   295 , 136–137.   https://doi.  org/10.1038/295136a0   (1982).  19.   Lakhina, G. S., Hajra, R. & Tsurutani, B. T.   Encyclopedia of Solid Earth Geophysics , chap. Geomagnetically Induced Currents,  523–527 (Springer International Publishing, 2021).  20.   Gil, A. et al. Review of geomagnetically induced current proxies in mid-latitude european countries.   Energies   16,   7406.   https://doi.  org/10.3390/en16217406   (2023).  21.   Švanda, M., Mourenas, D., Žertová, K. & Výbošt’oková, T. Immediate and delayed responses of power lines and transformers in  the Czech electric power grid to geomagnetic storms.   J. Space Weather Space Clim.   10 , 26.   https://doi.org/10.1051/swsc/2020025  (2020).  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   14 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports/

# Page 15

22.   Hajra, R., Tsurutani, B. T., Lakhina, G. S., Lu, Q. & Du, A. Interplanetary causes and impacts of the 2024 May superstorm on the  geosphere: An overview.   Astrophys. J.   974 , 264.   https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ad7462   (2024).  23.   Hajra, R. et al. The April 2023 SYM-H   =   -233 nT geomagnetic storm: A classical event.   J. Geophys. Res. Space Phys.   129 ,  e2024JA032986.   https://doi.org/10.1029/2024JA032986   (2024).  24.   Despirak, I. et al. Geomagnetically induced currents (GICs) during strong geomagnetic activity (storms, substorms, and magnetic  pulsations) on 23–24 April 2023.   J. Atmos. Solar Terr. Phys.   261 , 106293.   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jastp.2024.106293   (2024).  25.   Pirjola, R. & Lehtinen, M. Currents produced in the Finnish 400 kV power transmission grid and in the Finnish natural gas  pipeline by geomagnetically induced electric fields.   Ann. Geophys.   3 , 485–491 (1985).  26.   Pulkkinen, A., Viljanen, A., Pajunpää, K. & Pirjola, R. Recordings and occurrence of geomagnetically induced currents in the  finnish natural gas pipeline network.   J. Appl. Geophys.   48 , 219–231.   https://doi.org/10.1016/S0926-9851(01)00108-2   (2001).  27.   Viljanen, A. et al. Recordings of geomagnetically induced currents and a nowcasting service of the finnish natural gas pipeline  system.   Space Weather   4 , S10004.   https://doi.org/10.1029/2006SW000234   (2006).  28.   Boteler, D. H., Pirjola, R. J. & Marti, L. Analytic calculation of geoelectric fields due to geomagnetic disturbances: A test case.   IEEE  Access   7 , 147029–147037.   https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2945530   (2019).  29.   Boteler, D. H. & Pirjola, R. J. Numerical calculation of geoelectric fields that affect critical infrastructure.   Int. J. Geosci.   10 , 930–949.  https://doi.org/10.4236/ijg.2019.1010053   (2019).  30.   Abda, Z. M. K., Aziz, N. F. A., Kadir, M. Z. A. A. & Rhazali, Z. A. A review of geomagnetically induced current effects on electrical  power system: Principles and theory.   IEEE Access   8 , 200237–200258.   https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3034347   (2020).  31.   Weaver, J.T.   Mathematical methods for geo-electromagnetic induction , vol. 7 (Taunton, Somerset, England: Research Studies Press;  New York: Wiley, 1994).  32.   Trichtchenko, L. & Boteler, D. H. Modelling of geomagnetic induction in pipelines.   Ann. Geophys.   20 , 1063–1072.   https://doi.  org/10.5194/angeo-20-1063-2002   (2002).  33.   Ádám, A., Prácser, E. & Wesztergom, V. Estimation of the electric resistivity distribution (EURHOM) in the european lithosphere  in the frame of the eurisgic WP2 project.   Acta Geodaetica et Geophysica Hungarica   47 , 377–387.   https://doi.org/10.1556/  ageod.47.2012.4.1   (2012).  34.   Viljanen, A., Pirjola, R., Prácser, E., Katkalov, J. & Wik, M. Geomagnetically induced currents in Europe - modelled occurrence in  a continent-wide power grid.   J. Sp. Weather Sp. Clim.   4 , A09.   https://doi.org/10.1051/swsc/2014006   (2014).  35.   Gil, A. et al. Evaluating the relationship between strong geomagnetic storms and electric grid failures in poland using the geoelectric  field as a gic proxy.   J. Space Weather Space Clim.   11 , 30.   https://doi.org/10.1051/swsc/2021013   (2021).  36.   Beggan, C. D., Richardson, G. S., Baillie, O., Hübert, J. & Thomson, A. W. P. Geolectric field measurement, modelling and validation  during geomagnetic storms in the UK.   J. Space Weather Space Clim.   11 , 37.   https://doi.org/10.1051/swsc/2021022   (2021).  37.   Boteler, D. On choosing fourier transforms for practical geoscience applications.   Int. J. Geosci.   3 , 952–959.   https://doi.org/10.4236/  ijg.2012.325096   (2012).  38.   de Boor, C.   A Practical Guide to Spline , vol. 27 (New York: Springer, 1978, 1978).  39.   Sibson, R.   A brief description of natural neighbour interpolation   (John Wiley & Sons, 1981).  40.   Dimmock, A. P. et al. The GIC and geomagnetic response over Fennoscandia to the 7–8 September 2017 geomagnetic storm.   Space  Weather   17 , 989–1010.   https://doi.org/10.1029/2018SW002132   (2019).  41.   Clilverd, M. A. et al. Geomagnetically induced currents during the 07–08 September 2017 disturbed period: a global perspective.  J. Space Weather Space Clim.   11 , 33.   https://doi.org/10.1051/swsc/2021014   (2021).  42.   Sambridge, M., Braun, J. & McQueen, H. Geophysical parametrization and interpolation of irregular data using natural neighbours.  Geophys. J. Int.   122 , 837–857.   https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-246X.1995.tb06841.x   (1995).  43.   Gjerloev,   J.   W.   The   SuperMAG   data   processing   technique.   J.   Geophys.   Res.   (Space   Physics)   117 ,   A09213.   https://doi.  org/10.1029/2012JA017683   (2012).  44.   Newell, P. T. & Gjerloev, J. W. Evaluation of SuperMAG auroral electrojet indices as indicators of substorms and auroral power.   J.  Geophys. Res. (Space Phys.)   116 , A12211.   https://doi.org/10.1029/2011JA016779   (2011).  45.   Kennel, C. F., Edmiston, J. P. & Hada, T.   A Quarter Century of Collisionless Shock Research , 1–36 (American Geophysical Union  (AGU), 1985).  46.   Tsurutani, B. T., Gonzalez, W. D., Tang, F., Akasofu, S. I. & Smith, E. J. Origin of interplanetary southward magnetic fields  responsible for major magnetic storms near solar maximum (1978–1979).   J. Geophys. Res. Space Phys.   93 , 8519–8531.   https://doi.  org/10.1029/JA093iA08p08519   (1988).  47.   Abraham-Shrauner, B. Determination of magnetohydrodynamic shock normals.   J. Geophys. Res.   77 , 736–739.   https://doi.  org/10.1029/JA077i004p00736   (1972).  48.   Rankine, W. J. M. XV. on the thermodynamic theory of waves of finite longitudinal disturbance.   Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond.   160 ,  277–288.   https://doi.org/10.1098/rstl.1870.0015   (1870).  49.   Hugoniot, H. Memoire sur la propagation des mouvements dans les corps et specialement dans les gaz parfaits (premiere partie).  J. de l Ecole Polytechnique   57 , 3–97 (1887).  50.   Hugoniot, H. Memoire sur la propagation des mouvements dans les corps et specialement dans les gaz parfaits (deuxieme partie).  J. de l Ecole Polytechnique   58 , 1–125 (1889).  51.   Burlaga, L., Sittler, E., Mariani, F. & Schwenn, R. Magnetic loop behind an interplanetary shock: Voyager, Helios, and IMP 8  observations.   J. Geophys. Res. Space Physics   86 , 6673–6684.   https://doi.org/10.1029/JA086iA08p06673   (1981).  52.   Gonzalez, W. D. & Tsurutani, B. T. Criteria of interplanetary parameters causing intense magnetic storms (dst   <   -100nt).   Planet.  Space Sci.   35 , 1101–1109.   https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-0633(87)90015-8   (1987).  53.   Marubashi, K. & Lepping, R. P. Long-duration magnetic clouds: a comparison of analyses using torus- and cylinder-shaped flux  rope models.   Ann. Geophys.   25 , 2453–2477.   https://doi.org/10.5194/angeo-25-2453-2007   (2007).  54.   Tsurutani, B. T., Hajra, R., Echer, E. & Gjerloev, J. W. Extremely intense (SML   ≤ − 2500 nT) substorms: isolated events that are  externally triggered?.   Ann. Geophys.   33 , 519–524.   https://doi.org/10.5194/angeo-33-519-2015   (2015).  55.   Hajra, R., Tsurutani, B. T., Echer, E., Gonzalez, W. D. & Gjerloev, J. W. Supersubstorms (SML < -2500 nT): Magnetic storm and solar  cycle dependences.   J. Geophys. Res. Space Physics   121 , 7805–7816.   https://doi.org/10.1002/2015JA021835   (2016).  56.   Tsurutani, B. T. & Meng, C.-I. Interplanetary magnetic-field variations and substorm activity.   J. Geophys. Res.   77 , 2964–2970.  https://doi.org/10.1029/JA077i016p02964   (1972).  57.   Tsurutani, B. T. & Hajra, R. Energetics of shock-triggered supersubstorms (SML <   -2500 nT).   Astrophys. J.   946 , 17.   https://doi.  org/10.3847/1538-4357/acb143   (2023).  58.   Kruglyakov, M., Marshalko, E., Kuvshinov, A., Smirnov, M. & Viljanen, A. Multi-site transfer function approach for real-time  modeling of the ground electric field induced by laterally-nonuniform ionospheric source.   Space Weather   21 , e2023SW003621.  https://doi.org/10.1029/2023SW003621   (2023).  59.   Oliveira, D. M., Zesta, E. & Vidal-Luengo, S. First direct observations of interplanetary shock impact angle effects on actual  geomagnetically induced currents: The case of the finnish natural gas pipeline system.   Front. Astron. Space Sci.   11 .   https://doi.  org/10.3389/fspas.2024.1392697   (2024).  60.   Wik, M. et al. Calculation of geomagnetically induced currents in the 400 kV power grid in southern Sweden.   Space Weather   6 ,  S07005.   https://doi.org/10.1029/2007SW000343   (2008).  61.   Marshalko, E., Kruglyakov, M., Kuvshinov, A. & Viljanen, A. Three-dimensional modeling of the ground electric field in Fennoscandia  during the Halloween geomagnetic storm.   Space Weather   21 , e2022SW003370.   https://doi.org/10.1029/2022SW003370   (2023).  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   15 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports/

# Page 16

Acknowledgements  The work of A.W. was financed from the statutory funds of the CBK PAN. The work of R. H. is funded by the  “Hundred Talents Program” of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), and the Excellent Young Scientists Fund  Program (Overseas) of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC). The authors acknowledge the  OMNI database for the solar wind data ( http://cdaweb.gsfc.nasa.gov/cdaweb/istp_public/ . Data of geomagnetic  field components and geomagnetic indices are from IMAGE - International Monitor for Auroral Geomagnetic  Effect,   http://space.fmi.fi/image/ . GIC recordings in the Finnish natural gas pipeline near Mäntsälä are from  Finnish Meteorological Institute,   https://space.fmi.fi/gic/ . We gratefully acknowledge the SuperMAG collabora -  tors, the auroral SML index is taken from   https://supermag.jhuapl.edu/ .  Author contributions  A.W., B.T.T., A.G. and R.M. conceptualized the work. A.W. and R.W. performed the analysis. A.W. prepared Figs.  1 ,   3 ,   4 ,   5 ,   6 ,   7 ,   8 ,   9   and Supplementary Videos   S1   and   S2 . R.H. prepared Fig.   2 . A.W., R.H., A.G., R.M., and B.T.T.  wrote the main manuscript text. All authors reviewed the manuscript, and approved the final published version.  Declarations  Competing interests  The authors declare no competing interests.  Additional information  Supplementary Information   The online version contains supplementary material available at   https://doi.  org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z .  Correspondence   and requests for materials should be addressed to A.W.  Reprints and permissions information   is available at   www.nature.com/reprints .  Publisher’s note   Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and  institutional affiliations.  Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives  4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in  any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide  a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have  permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or  other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated  otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and  your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain  permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit   http://creativecommons.org/  licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ .  © The Author(s) 2024  Scientific Reports   |   (2024) 14:25074   16 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-z  www.nature.com/scientificreports/

## Figure Captions (auto-extracted)

- **p.3 (Fig 1.)** Figure 1. Correlation coefficients between E determined in measurement point and E obtained as a result of interpolation performed by using nearest neighbor (green line), linear (blue line), cubic spline (black line) and natural neighbor (red line) techniques. The 19 stations indicated on the x-axis were considered as verification
- **p.4 (Fig 1)** Figure 1 reveals the varying levels of effectiveness among the interpolation methods, which directly depend on the specific stations considered. Verification of interpolation quality has been performed by regression analysis between the time series measured in a given station and the time series interpolated for the same
- **p.4 (Fig 2)** Fig. 2¢), ram pressure Fy, (~ 1.2 to ~ 8.0 nPa, Fig. 2c), temperature 7, (~ 1.7 x 10* to ~ 25.2 x 10* K, Fig. 2d, black), and IMF magnitude Bj, (~ 10.3 to ~ 25.2 nT, Fig. 2e). From an analysis of high-resolution plasma and IMF data collected by the Wind spacecraft through the mixed-mode discontinuity normal analysis*’ and the
- **p.5 (Fig 2.)** Figure 2. Solar wind plasma and interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) during the intense storm of April, 2023. From top to bottom, the panels show: (a) solar wind proton speed V/,, (b) Alfvén Mach number Mj, the horizontal dashed line indicating M4 = 1, (c) proton density NV, (black, legend on the left) and ram pressure
- **p.5 (Fig i)** figure is adapted from Hajra et al.>>. Inside the MC, low NN, lead to low Alfvén Mach number Mj of ~ 0.5 at ~12:48 UT on April 24 (Fig. 2b). The ~ 2.1-h long (from ~12:25 UT to ~14:33 UT on April 24, marked by a light-cyan shading) sub-Alfvénic
- **p.5 (Fig 2)** Figure 2g presents the GIC measurements at a gas pipeline near Mantsild, Finland (60.6° N geographic latitude, 25.2° E geographic longitude). It shows several strong GICs. In particular, there are several intervals on April 23, where the GIC peaks (|GIC|) were > 20 A, e.g., from 19:03:40 to 19:04:00 UT (27.32 A), from 19:04:40
- **p.5 (Fig 3)** Figure 3 shows the magnitudes of the computed E-fields F' = \/E% + E% between 12:00 UT on April 23 and 12:00 UT on April 24 for five selected stations: SOL, DOB, UPS, NUR, and TAR. These stations are located at Scientific Reports | (2024) 14:25074 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-76449-7 nature portfolio
- **p.6 (Fig 3.)** Figure 3. Computed geoelectric field E during the April 23-24, 2023 storm event for five selected stations: SOL (a), DOB (b), UPS (c¢), NUR (d), and TAR (e). For comparison, Méntsald GIC (black, legend on the left) and SML index (red, legend on the right) in panel f have been shown. Event I and II are marked by red vertical
- **p.7 (Fig 4.)** Figure 4. Geoelectric field E during the April 23, 2023 storm event (from 16:00 to 23:00 UT) for seven selected stations: MAS (a), IVA (b), SOD (c), RAN (d), OUJ (e), MEK (f) and HAN (g). For comparison, Mantsédla GIC (black, legend on the left) and SML index (red, legend on the right) in panel h have been shown. Event I is
- **p.8 (Fig 5.)** Figure 5. Geoelectric field E during the April 24, 2023 storm event (from 00:00 to 08:00 UT) for seven selected stations: MAS (a), IVA (b), SOD (c), RAN (d), OU] (e), MEK (f) and HAN (g). For comparison, Mantsdla GIC (black, legend on the left) and SML index (red, legend on the right) in panel h have been shown. Event II is
- **p.9 (Fig 6.)** Figure 6. Geomagnetic field components Bx (a) and By (b) measured during the April 23, 2023 storm event (from 16:00 to 23:00 UT) at selected stations: MAS, IVA, SOD, RAN, OU]J, MEK and HAN. The dashed vertical black line is the shock arrival time (~ 17:35 UT), the Event I is represented by a red dashed line.
- **p.9 (Fig 7)** Figure 7 shows the computed E magnitude and direction maps at three time intervals during Event I. The measured GICs at Méntsdla and SML index are shown at the top for context. The three intervals of maps are shown, marked by red circles in the top panel.
- **p.10 (Fig 7.)** Figure 7. (top) GICs at Mantsala (black, legend on the left) and the SML index (red, legend on the right) around Event I. Three intervals/times are denoted by red circles, marked as (a-c). (middle) E magnitude maps corresponding to (a-c). (bottom) E direction maps corresponding to (a—c). Color bars at the right
- **p.11 (Fig 8.)** Figure 8. Same as in Fig. 7, but for Event II. Figure 8 presents GIC measurements at Méntsala and SML index (top panel) and the three selected maps of the E-field magnitude (middle panel) and direction (bottom panel) at 03:54:00 UT, 03:56:40 UT, and 03:58:40 UT.
- **p.12 (Fig 9.)** Figure 9. GICs measured (red) and modeled based on the E-field (black) along the Finnish natural gas pipeline at the Méntséla station. Event I and Event II are marked by red vertical dashed lines. Thus, Event II was related to the local substorm-like intensification with intense magnetic pulsations in the
- **p.13 (Fig 9)** Figure 9 shows the measured (red) and reproduced (black) GIC values in Méntsala. The correlation coefficient between these two quantities, determined for period from 16:00 UT to 23:00 UT on April 23 (Fig. 9a) is ~ 0.73 . As can be seen from Fig. 9a, the modeled GIC values present two strong peaks before Event I (marked by
- **p.13 (Fig 9)** Figure 9c, which is an enlarged part of Fig. 9b, shows, however, that the modeled GIC values (with a maximum value of ~ 60 A) are significantly higher than the measured GICs just before Event II between ~ 3:50 and ~3:54 UT on April 24. For comparison, Despirack et al.** reported very strong GICs at VKH (~ 45 A)
