<!-- PK_KEY: PDF_wⱤⱦns_ⱦt_ⱥl_2021_thⱦ_sⱦⱤsmⱤc_strƗctƗrⱦ_Ⱨf_thⱦ_ⱥntⱥ_ⱤⱧƗ_38CFF0995642 -->

Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025




    The seismic structure of the Antarctic upper mantle

    Douglas A. Wiens1*, Weisen Shen2 and Andrew J. Lloyd3
    1
      Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Washington University in St Louis, St Louis, MO 63130, USA
    2
      Department of Geosciences, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-2100, USA
    3
      Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University, Palisades, NY 10964, USA
       DAW, 0000-0002-5169-4386; WS, 0000-0002-3766-632X; AJL, 0000-0002-2253-1342
    *Correspondence: doug@wustl.edu


    Abstract: The deployment of seismic stations and the development of ambient noise tomography as well as new analysis methods provide an
    opportunity for higher-resolution imaging of Antarctica. Here we review recent seismic structure models and describe their implications for the
    dynamics and history of the Antarctic upper mantle. Results show that most of East Antarctica is underlain by continental lithosphere to depths
    of approximately 200 km. The thickest lithosphere is found in a band 500–1000 km inboard from the Transantarctic Mountains, representing
    the continuation of cratonic lithosphere with Australian afﬁnity beneath the ice. Dronning Maud Land and the Lambert Graben show much
    thinner lithosphere, consistent with Phanerozoic lithospheric disruption. The Transantarctic Mountains mark a sharp boundary between cra-
    tonic lithosphere and the warmer upper mantle of West Antarctica. In the southern Transantarctic Mountains, cratonic lithosphere has been
    replaced by warm asthenosphere, giving rise to Cenozoic volcanism and an elevated mountainous region. The Marie Byrd Land volcanic
    dome is underlain by slow seismic velocities extending through the transition zone, consistent with a mantle plume. Slow-velocity anomalies
    beneath the coast from the Amundsen Sea Embayment to the Antarctic Peninsula are likely to result from upwelling of warm asthenosphere
    during subduction of the Antarctic–Phoenix spreading centre.




    Seismological imaging provides essential constraints on the                        source seismic studies provide important details in some
    physical processes and conditions shaping the upper mantle                         speciﬁc regions.
    beneath Antarctica. Unlike other continents, the Antarctic
    mantle is overlain not only by the crust and sedimentary
    cover, but also by a thick ice sheet, which greatly limits geo-
    logical mapping and sampling. Thus, seismological studies                          Seismic data and analysis methods
    applied to Antarctica fulﬁll a unique role by providing
    information on poorly constrained geological processes that                        Antarctic seismic data
    have formed the continent. The ice sheets also constitute
    large, temporally varying loads that cause deformation of                          From the 1950s through to the 1990s, seismographs were
    the mantle and the land surface through glacial isostatic adjust-                  largely restricted to a few permanently occupied bases. With
    ment. Seismology is able to characterize lateral variations in                     the exception of South Pole, these were generally along the
    the temperature proﬁle of the upper mantle and crust, and                          coasts, so the interior of Antarctica was relatively unexplored
    thus constrain the geothermal heat ﬂux (Shapiro and Ritzwol-                       from a seismological standpoint. Thus, maps of Antarctic
    ler 2004; Shen et al. 2020). These thermal properties control                      mantle structure from that time period showed very limited
    the response of the mantle and the land surface to glaciation                      resolution compared to other parts of the world. Active source
    (Ivins and Sammis 1995; Ivins and James 2005; van der                              seismic refraction lines did provide estimates of crustal thick-
    Wal et al. 2015; Ivins et al. In press), and affect the future                     ness and uppermost mantle P-wave velocity in several places
    evolution of the ice sheet (Gomez et al. 2015; Whitehouse                          (Bentley 1973; ten Brink et al. 1993; Leitchenkov and
    et al. 2019).                                                                      Kudryavtzev 1997; Trey et al. 1999).
       Seismographs were part of the scientiﬁc agenda for Antarc-                         The advent of technology for operating autonomous broad-
    tic exploration from the very ﬁrst expeditions. A Milne seis-                      band seismographs in remote parts of the Antarctic interior has
    mograph was operated by Robert F. Scott’s Discovery                                revolutionized seismic studies in Antarctica over the past two
    Expedition (1901–04) for more than a year at Hut Point,                            decades. Initial projects, including SEPA (Robertson Maurice
    near modern-day McMurdo Station, and dozens of earth-                              et al. 2003), ANUBIS (Anandakrishnan et al. 2000), TAM-
    quakes were detected (Bernacchi and Milne 1908). A seismo-                         SEIS (Lawrence et al. 2006a), SSCUA (Reading 2006) and
    graph was installed at the South Pole base during the                              a deployment in the Transantarctic Mountains (Bannister
    International Geophysical Year in 1957. However, despite                           et al. 2003), generally operated stations only in the summer
    these early efforts, it was not until the turn of the century                      months. However, more recent large-scale deployments such
    that autonomous seismographs were installed in Antarctica,                         as AGAP/GAMSEIS (Hansen et al. 2010), Ross Ice Shelf
    allowing the underlying structure of the continent to be                           (Baker et al. 2019), TAMNNET (Hansen et al. 2015) and
    revealed at greater resolution.                                                    UKANET (O’Donnell et al. 2019b) have provided high-
       The last two decades have seen rapid progress both in                           quality data throughout the year. In many cases the seismo-
    seismological instrumentation in Antarctica and in seismic                         graphs remained deployed for only about 2 years, although
    analysis methods to utilize these data. The results of these                       the POLENET/A-NET project (Accardo et al. 2014) has
    efforts are detailed seismological models describing the 3D                        maintained some remote autonomous stations for over a dec-
    structure of the Antarctic upper mantle, as well as crustal                        ade. Figure 1 shows the distribution of Antarctic broadband
    thickness. Here we review these models and brieﬂy describe                         seismic stations providing data for analyses discussed here.
    their implications for understanding the dynamics and history                      The combined distribution of seismic stations provides rea-
    of the Antarctic upper mantle. This review concentrates on                         sonably good coverage at the several hundred-kilometre
    large-scale studies of the upper-mantle structure from analysis                    level in West Antarctica; however, vast regions of East Ant-
    of passive seismic recording, while recognizing that active                        arctica remain without instrumentation.
    From: Martin, A. P. and van der Wal, W. (eds) 2023. The Geochemistry and Geophysics of the Antarctic Mantle.
    Geological Society, London, Memoirs, 56, 195–212,
    First published online 17 September 2021, https://doi.org/10.1144/M56-2020-18
    © 2021 The Author(s). This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
    (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Published by The Geological Society of London. Publishing disclaimer: www.geolsoc.org.uk/pub_ethics
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

      196                                                                 D. A. Wiens et al.




      Fig. 1. Map of broadband seismic stations deployed in Antarctica and used in recent seismic studies. Permanent seismic stations, generally at Antarctic
      research stations, are shown as green boxes, and temporary seismic stations are shown as triangles. The key identiﬁes some of the larger temporary seismic
      station deployments.



      Body-wave tomography and receiver functions                                      2015, 2020). The thickness of the transition zone allows
                                                                                       identiﬁcation of temperature anomalies at transition zone
      P- and S-wave tomography using teleseismic arrivals can                          depths due to the different signs of the Clapyron slopes of
      provide strong constraints on lateral velocity variations in                     the olivine to wadsleyite and ringwoodite to bridgemanite
      the upper mantle of Antarctica (Watson et al. 2006; Lloyd                        phase transitions denoted by these discontinuities (e.g. Bina
      et al. 2013, 2015; Hansen et al. 2014; Brenn et al. 2017;                        and Helffrich 1994).
      White-Gaynor et al. 2019; Lucas et al. 2020b). In these stud-
      ies, arrival time anomalies across a seismic array are calculated
      from P- or S-waveforms using cross-correlation, and the travel                   Surface waves from earthquakes and ambient noise
      time anomalies are then inverted for the velocity structure
      beneath the array. These studies typically yield detailed                        Surface-wave tomography can image the crust and upper man-
      images of lateral velocity variations, but provide limited con-                  tle with superior depth resolution due to the relationship
      straints on the depths of the velocity anomalies. Continent-                     between surface-wave dispersion and velocity structure with
      wide body-wave tomography models suffer from highly                              depth. However, good resolution is generally limited to the
      variable resolution, with good resolution in areas with greater                  upper 200–250 km of the Earth, and the resulting structures
      seismic station density, such as parts of West Antarctica, and                   are usually quite smooth, without sharp interfaces. Traditional
      poor resolution in regions of sparse station coverage.                           surface-wave methods involve analysing individual seismo-
         Body-wave arrivals can also be analysed for structural inter-                 grams to determine the surface-wave group and phase velocity
      faces or discontinuities below the seismic station using                         along the path from earthquake to receiver, and then perform-
      receiver function methodology. This method processes the                         ing a tomographic inversion at each period to generate phase
      horizontal and vertical components of body waves to enhance                      and group velocity maps (Roult et al. 1994; Danesi and
      arrivals converted from S to P or P to S at structural interfaces                Morelli 2001; Ritzwoller et al. 2001). These maps can then
      (e.g. Ammon 1991). In general, P-wave receiver functions                         be inverted to determine shear velocity at each location. The
      yield good resolution of Moho depth as well as shallow inter-                    inclusion of higher-mode Rayleigh-wave measurements
      faces, and have provided estimates of crustal thickness for                      improves the resolution at depths of >200 km (Sieminski
      many locations around the continent (Bannister et al. 2003;                      et al. 2003). In some cases, the surface-wave group velocity
      Reading 2006; Chaput et al. 2014; Ramirez et al. 2017). For                      measurements may be inverted directly for shear velocity
      some areas with a thick ice sheet, S-wave receiver functions                     (An et al. 2015).
      provide better results because the Moho conversion is not                           Denser arrays of seismographs on the Antarctic interior can
      obscured by reverberations of seismic energy in the ice (Han-                    be used to determine the phase velocity of Rayleigh waves
      sen et al. 2009, 2010; Ramirez et al. 2016). P-wave receiver                     from teleseismic earthquakes travelling across the continent
      functions are also used to study the depth of the 410 and                        (Lawrence et al. 2006b). In one implementation, the incoming
      660 km discontinuities in the mantle, and thus infer the thick-                  Rayleigh waves are approximated as two interfering plane
      ness of the transition zone (Reusch et al. 2008; Emry et al.                     waves, with seismograms then analysed to determine phase
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

                                                     Seismic structure of the Antarctic upper mantle                                           197


    velocity images as a function of period, which are then                    anisotropy of West Antarctica is greater than that of East Ant-
    inverted for velocity structure (Forsyth and Li 2005; Heeszel              arctica (Accardo et al. 2014; Lucas et al. 2020a). The anisot-
    et al. 2013, 2016). Surface-wave phase and group velocities                ropy fast directions show a complex pattern related to the
    can also be measured from seismic Green’s functions derived                tectonic development of the region. The directions do not gen-
    by cross-correlating ambient noise at station pairs. This                  erally align with the velocity of the Antarctic Plate in an abso-
    approach produces more accurate results than measurements                  lute reference frame, indicating that the anisotropy is not due
    from earthquake records at short periods (Shapiro et al.                   to mantle shear from the continent moving relative to the
    2005; Pyle et al. 2010). Phase velocities determined by ambi-              deeper mantle (Accardo et al. 2014).
    ent noise at shorter periods (c. 8–45 s) are often combined with
    phase velocities from earthquakes at longer periods (c. 25–
    120 s) to provide phase velocities across a wide period band,              Bayesian joint inversion
    and to constrain both shallow crustal and deeper mantle
    structure (Shen et al. 2018a; O’Donnell et al. 2019b). In                  The large-scale collection of broadband seismic data at
    areas with thinner crust, such as the Ross Embayment, the                  regional or continental scales over the past two decades has
    addition of ambient noise provides key constraints to the                  enabled the joint analysis of multiple types of seismic observa-
    uppermost mantle structure.                                                tions. Local surface-wave dispersion properties and P-wave
                                                                               Moho conversion waveforms (i.e. receiver functions) are
                                                                               typical choices since they can be incorporated into a relatively
    Seismic anisotropy analysis                                                simple local inversion for a 1D model (Julià et al. 2000; Chang
                                                                               et al. 2004; Lawrence and Wiens 2004). Among various
    Seismic anisotropy, or the directional dependence of seismic               realizations, the joint inversion under the Bayesian framework
    velocities resulting from directional dependence of the elastic            has been popular, since the associated uncertainties of the
    moduli, has the potential to reveal further information about              resulting 3D model can be quantiﬁed from Monte Carlo
    mantle structure and processes. Seismic anisotropy is often a              sampling.
    result of lattice-preferred orientation, which is the alignment               For Antarctica, this approach has been applied to data col-
    of the crystallographic axes of anisotropic minerals by rock               lected by more than 200 seismic stations deployed between
    fabric or deformation. Alternatively, seismic anisotropy can               1998 and 2017. Shen et al. (2018b) constructed a new seismic
    result from shape-preferred orientation, or the alignment of               model for central and West Antarctica by jointly inverting
    geometrical objects of different seismic velocity, such as elon-           Rayleigh-wave phase and group velocities along with
    gated minerals or larger objects such as dykes or sills. Studies           P-wave receiver functions. In this work, ambient noise tomog-
    of naturally deformed mantle xenoliths (Mainprice and Silver               raphy is used to construct Rayleigh-wave phase and group
    1993; Chatzaras and Kruckenberg 2021), as well as laboratory               velocity dispersion maps at relatively short periods (8–40 s),
    studies of artiﬁcially deformed olivine aggregates (Zhang and              and teleseismic earthquake-derived phase velocity maps at
    Karato 1995), indicate that mantle seismic anisotropy gener-               longer periods (32–c. 140 s) are taken from Heeszel et al.
    ally results from lattice-preferred orientation. The fast axis             (2016). Comparison between the two sets of phase velocity
    of anisotropy is usually parallel to the extension direction or            maps at 30 s presents a difference of −0.002 ± 0.027 km s−1
    to the ﬂow direction if there is a ﬂow fabric, although other              (<0.1% on average) for phase velocity in West and central
    orientations are possible under conditions of high water or                Antarctica. This difference level is similar to the analogous
    high stress (Karato et al. 2008). Thus, mantle anisotropy is               comparison made in North America where seismic stations
    commonly used to indicate the extension direction of mantle                were denser, showing that high-quality ambient noise tomog-
    deformation or the direction of mantle ﬂow.                                raphy can be applied to the remote continent.
       Seismic observations cannot fully determine the general                    These Rayleigh-wave phase and group velocity maps,
    elastic tensor for anisotropic media, so several different tech-           together with P receiver function waveforms, were then used
    niques are used to constrain different aspects of anisotropy.              to construct a new 3D shear velocity model for the crust and
    Radial anisotropy (transverse isotropy) can be thought of as               uppermost mantle using a Bayesian Monte Carlo algorithm.
    the difference between vertical (VSV) and horizontally (VSH)               Since the velocities are determined from Rayleigh waves,
    polarized shear-wave velocities, and is usually measured by                the maps show the velocity of vertically polarized shear
    jointly analysing Love and Rayleigh surface waves. The                     waves (VSV). Each Bayesian Monte Carlo inversion provides
    uppermost mantle shows positive radial anisotropy (VSH>VSV)                an ensemble of 1D models that ﬁt both types of data. A ﬁnal
    in most places worldwide (Panning and Romanowicz                           3D model is then constructed by taking the average 1D models
    2006; Kustowski et al. 2008). Seismic models for Antarctica                from the ensembles, and associated uncertainties are deﬁned
    also show strong positive radial anisotropy (Ritzwoller et al.             by the standard deviation of the ensembles. An example of
    2001; Lloyd 2018; Zhou et al. 2019; O’Donnell et al.                       the inversion procedure for a station in East Antarctica is
    2019a), although the spatial pattern is not well resolved.                 shown in Figure 3, giving the ﬁt of the preferred model to
       Azimuthal anisotropy can be evaluated by measuring the                  the surface-wave data (Fig. 3a) and P-wave receiver function
    variation of P-, S- or surface-wave velocities with azimuth,               (Fig. 3b). Incorporation of the P-wave receiver function into
    or by shear-wave splitting measurements. Shear waves propa-                the inversion reduces the uncertainty in the Moho depth and
    gating through an anisotropic media are split along fast and               crustal velocities, as shown by the comparison of the resulting
    slow vibration planes, allowing the fast direction and magni-              structure and standard deviation (Fig. 3c, d) and prior and pos-
    tude of anisotropy to be estimated. SKS and SKKS phases                    terior distributions (Fig. 3f–h) for the joint inversion, as well as
    from distant earthquakes are particularly useful, since they               the inversion of surface-wave data alone. A similar Monte
    eliminate the possibility that the anisotropy is near the source,          Carlo approach applied to Rayleigh- and Love-wave disper-
    and results are commonly interpreted as upper-mantle anisot-               sions has helped to construct a 3D anisotropic model for the
    ropy beneath the receiver (Silver 1996; Savage 1999). Several              crust (Zhou et al. 2019).
    SKS splitting studies have been carried out in Antarctica (Mul-               The resulting 3D seismic model covers most of West Ant-
    ler 2001; Bayer et al. 2007; Reading and Heintz 2008; Bark-                arctica and parts of East Antarctica where there is adequate
    lage et al. 2009; Accardo et al. 2014). Results show strong                seismic station coverage for this method (Fig. 4), and extends
    azimuthal anisotropy in parts of West Antarctica (Fig. 2),                 down to the limit of good depth resolution with funda-
    and indicate that the average upper-mantle azimuthal                       mental mode Rayleigh waves (about 200 km). The shear-wave
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

      198                                                                      D. A. Wiens et al.




      Fig. 2. Shear-wave splitting results for central West Antarctica from Accardo et al. (2014). The region shown is outlined in the green box on the inset map of
      Antarctica. Vector azimuths denote the average fast direction of splitting for arrivals at a given station. The length of the vector is proportional to the splitting
      time, with the splitting timescale indicated on the right. Thick red vectors represent the highest-quality measurements, thin red vectors represent the
      intermediate-quality measurements, and black vectors represent results assembled from other studies. Solid green arrows indicate the direction of Antarctic
      absolute plate motion in the hotspot reference frame. The background colour scale indicates bedrock elevation from Fretwell et al. (2013). Abbreviations: PIR,
      Pine Island Rift; BSB, Byrd Subglacial Basin; BST, Bentley Subglacial Trench; EWM, Ellsworth–Whitmore Mountains; WARS, West Antarctic Rift System.


      velocity maps show a clear dichotomy of the tectonically                               mantle model S362ANI (Kustowski et al. 2008) and a modi-
      active West Antarctica and the stable and ancient (Fig. 4). In                         ﬁed version of CRUST1.0 (see Lloyd et al. 2020). During
      addition, the model shows signiﬁcant velocity anomalies                                each iteration, the model was updated to include increasingly
      within both West Antarctica and the central part of East Ant-                          shorter wavelength features based on travel time observations
      arctica, which will be discussed later in this chapter.                                between observed and synthetic earthquake seismograms.
                                                                                             These observations include P, S, Rayleigh and Love waves,
                                                                                             including reﬂections and overtones, from 270 earthquakes
                                                                                             recorded at 323 seismic stations, many of which are shown
      Adjoint tomography                                                                     in Figure 1. Since ANT-20 uses both Love and Rayleigh
                                                                                             waves to produce a radially anisotropic model, maps of veloc-
      The use of 3D numerical waveﬁeld simulations (Komatitsch                               ity heterogeneity show the Voigt average shear velocity:
      and Vilotte 1998; Komatitsch and Tromp 1999) along with
      adjoint inversion methods (e.g. Tarantola 1984; Tromp et al.                                                            rﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
      2005) are proving to be a powerful tool for imaging Earth’s                                                              VSH 2 + 2VSV 2
      seismological structure (e.g. Fichtner et al. 2009; Tape et al.                                              VS Voigt =                                            (1)
                                                                                                                                           3
      2010; Zhu et al. 2015; Bozdağ et al. 2016). Although compu-
      tationally expensive, these iterative methods are advantageous
      because they account for many of the complexities associated                           Because VSH is generally faster than VSV in the upper mantle,
      with seismic-wave propagation in a complex 3D medium, and                              the Voigt average velocities are about 1–2% faster than VSV.
      thus allow for the accurate and efﬁcient determination of syn-                            The high computational cost of the adjoint inversion, c. 3
      thetic seismograms and sensitivity kernels for all body- and                           million CPU hours to produce ANT-20, limits the ability to
      surface-wave arrivals (Komatitsch and Tromp 2002a, b).                                 assess the model’s resolution or uncertainty. Thus, evaluation
      The ability to use a much larger portion of the seismic wave-                          of resolution relies on proxies for data density and point-
      ﬁeld, in comparison to traditional seismic imaging, to accu-                           spread function tests. These tests show that structures appear-
      rately map out the observational sensitivities to Earth                                ing in ANT-20, south of 60° S, are reliably resolved within the
      structure, and to avoid simplifying assumptions, such as the                           upper mantle and transition zone (Lloyd et al. 2020). The
      high frequency approximation of ray theory, permits higher-                            length scales of the imaged features are limited by the smooth-
      ﬁdelity seismic images over large and poorly sampled regions.                          ing employed in the inversion. The lateral smoothing length
         Lloyd et al. (2020) used this iterative adjoint tomographic                         ranges from c. 140 km in the upper mantle to c. 340 km in
      inversion to seismically image the entire Antarctic continent                          the transition zone, while the vertical smoothing length is
      and the surrounding southern oceans to depths of 800 km at                             held ﬁxed at c. 45 km at all depths throughout the inversion.
      resolutions approaching that of regional studies. The resulting                        These facts, combined with comparisons to regional seismic
      radial anisotropic model (ANT-20) was determined following                             models (e.g. Heeszel et al. 2016; Shen et al. 2018b; O’Donnell
      20 iterations, with a 3D starting model based on the global                            et al. 2019a) and other geophysical observations, indicate that
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

                                                     Seismic structure of the Antarctic upper mantle                                             199




             (a)




                         Period (s)


             (b)                                                                                           Fig. 3. Example of the joint inversion of
                                                                                                           surface-wave dispersion (SW) and
                                                                                                           P-wave receiver functions (PRF) for
                                                                                                           POLENET seismic station SWEI (Shen
                                                                                                           et al. 2018b). (a) and (b) Observed
                                               (c)                                 (d)                     Rayleigh-wave phase and group
                                                                                                           velocity dispersion curves (a) and
                                                      Vs                                  Vs               P-wave receiver function waveform (b)
                                                                                                           at station SWEI. The square root of the
                                                                                                           reduced χ 2 misﬁt for the preferred
                                                                                                           model is is given in parentheses. (c) and
                                                                                                           (d) Results from the joint inversion of
                                                                                                           both surface-wave and receiver function
                                             (e)                                          (f)              data (c) and surface-wave data alone
                                                                                                           (d). Grey corridors represent the 1D
                                                                                                           seismic model emsembles, with black
                                                                                                           and red lines showing the average
                                                                                                           shear-wave velocity (VSV) and the
                                                                                                           standard deviation of the 1D model. (e)
                                                                                                           Predicted receiver function waveform
                                                                                                           from models in (c) and (d) are shown as
                                                                                                           red and grey waveforms. Observed
                                                                                                           receiver functions with uncertainties are
                                                                                                           shown as two thick blue lines. (f)–(h)
                   (g)                                       (h)                                           Prior and posterior distributions of
                                                                                                           crustal VSV (15 km: f ), crustal thickness
                                                                                                           (g) and mantle VSV (80 km: h). Prior
                                                                                                           distributions are shown by unﬁlled bars
                                                                                                           and joint inversion posterior
                                                                                                           distributions are shown in red, while the
                                                                                                           surface-wave inversion posterior
                                                                                                           distribution is in blue.



    ANT-20 possesses similarly high resolution across the entire               techniques play an outsized role in constraining the formation
    Antarctic region.                                                          and geological history of EA.
                                                                                  Most of EA is underlain by thick continental lithosphere, as
                                                                               deﬁned by strong positive velocity anomalies relative to global
                                                                               averages, which extends to depths of >200 km in several
    Upper-mantle structure of Antarctica’s tectonic regions                    places (Figs 6 & 7). Similar to mantle lithosphere beneath
                                                                               other cratons worldwide, this continental lithosphere repre-
    East Antarctica                                                            sents ancient, cooled mantle that that may be isopycnic, and
                                                                               thus stable due to competing thermal and compositional
    Antarctica is divided into two very different geological sub-              buoyancy forces (Jordan 1981; Sleep 2005). The fast shear
    continents, with East Antarctica (EA) representing largely Pre-            velocities arise predominantly from cold temperatures due to
    cambrian cratonic units and West Antarctica (WA) consisting                conductive cooling and to a lesser extent from a depleted man-
    of terranes formed or tectonically modiﬁed during the Meso-                tle chemistry (e.g. Lee 2003; Schutt and Lesher 2006). For
    zoic and Cenozoic. Most of EA shows crustal thicknesses                    other continental cratons with extensive xenolith data, there
    that are typical for continental cratons (Pappa et al. 2019b;              is good agreement between mantle-temperature proﬁles
    Szwillus et al. 2019), whereas WA shows thinner crust similar              inferred from mantle xenoliths and shear velocities, with
    to crustal thicknesses found in regions of extended Phanero-               both indicating thick, cold lithosphere extending to depths
    zoic continental crust (Fig. 5). Although Archean–early Paleo-             of >200 km (Priestley and McKenzie 2006).
    zoic outcrops have been sampled and mapped near the coasts                    Although most of EA shows seismic velocity anomalies of
    and in the Transantarctic Mountains (TAMS) (Tingey 1991;                   about 5–6% fast at depths of 75–150 km, greater variability in
    Fitzsimons 2000; Goodge et al. 2001), most of the EA interior              seismic velocity is found beneath the East Antarctic High-
    is covered by thick ice sheets, greatly limiting our understand-           lands, stretching from western Dronning Maud Land to the
    ing of its geology. Thus, seismology and other geophysical                 Lambert Graben, containing several regions with mantle
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

      200                                                              D. A. Wiens et al.


            (a)                                               (b)




            (c)                                               (d)




                                                                                                               Fig. 4. Uppermost mantle VSV structure
                                                                                                               from the Bayesian Monte Carlo joint
                                                                                                               inversion of surface-wave dispersion
                                                                                                               and receiver functions (Shen et al.
                                                                                                               2018b). Maps show horizontal sections
                                                                                                               for depths of (a) 60 km, (b) 80 km, (c)
                                                                                                               120 km and (d) 160 km. Dotted lines
                                                                                                               enclose the Gamburtsev Subglacial
                                                                                                               Mountains (GSM), Transantarctic
                                                                                                               Mountains (TAMS), Ellsworth–
                                                                                                               Whitmore Mountains (EWM) and Marie
                                                                                                               Byrd Land highlands (MBL).



      velocities close to the global average (Fig. 6). This contrasts              The distribution of the fastest seismic velocities and thickest
      with several regions in central Antarctica that show fast-                   lithosphere in the Lloyd et al. (2020) seismic velocity structure
      velocity anomalies as large as 7–8% and lithospheric thick-                  correlates well with the proposed extent of the Mawson Con-
      nesses of >200 km. The variation in mantle lithospheric thick-               tinent, supporting the idea that this region represents the late
      ness and seismic velocity proﬁles allows us to understand                    Archean–Paleoproterozoic cratonic nucleus of Gondwana.
      better the distribution of lithospheric terrane ages within EA                  Thick, cold lithosphere also extends beneath the Gamburt-
      and to place constraints on the geological evolution of the                  sev Subglacial Mountains, an enigmatic highland in central
      continent.                                                                   Antarctica with peaks reaching to 3000 m (Ferraccioli et al.
         The fastest seismic velocities and the thickest continental               2011). Surface-wave (Heeszel et al. 2013) and body-wave
      lithosphere, extending to depths of >200 km, occur along a                   (Lloyd et al. 2013) tomography show that the lateral variation
      band extending almost entirely across Antarctica 500–                        in mantle velocity is modest, precluding signiﬁcant Mesozoic
      1000 km inboard from the TAMS (Fig. 7). Some of the thick-                   or Cenozoic mantle tectonism or rejuvenation. A systematic
      est lithosphere is found inboard of the Miller Range in the                  comparison of Rayleigh-wave phase velocity curves world-
      TAMS where 3.15–3.05 Ga Nimrod Complex rocks conﬁrm                          wide shows that the Gamburtsev Mountains phase velocities
      the existence of Archean-age terranes, although Mesoprotero-                 are best matched by Archean and Paleoproterozoic regions,
      zoic units are also found in that region (Goodge and Fanning                 suggesting that the mountains are underlain by ancient conti-
      1999, 2016), and glacial granitoid clasts show ages ranging                  nental lithosphere (Heeszel et al. 2013). Shen et al. (2018a)
      from 2.01 to 1.06 Ga (Goodge et al. 2017). The thick litho-                  found that uppermost mantle velocities (Moho–100 km
      sphere extends to the Shackleton Range, near the Weddell                     depth) below the Gamburtsev Mountains are anomalously
      Embayment, where Paleoproterozoic rocks are preserved                        low, by 2–4%, relative to expected lithospheric craton veloc-
      (Brommer et al. 1999; Will et al. 2009). Boger (2011) pro-                   ities. They are also lower than surrounding regions of EA and
      posed that the ‘Shackleton’ and ‘Nimrod’ cratons are con-                    the deeper lithosphere. A detailed discussion in Shen et al.
      nected to late Archean ‘Gawler Craton’ rocks exposed in                      (2018b) demonstrated that this anomaly is unlikely to have a
      Australia (Swain et al. 2005) and along the corresponding                    thermal origin but is most likely to be the signature of a com-
      Tierra Adélie coast of Antarctica (Oliver and Fanning 2002).                 positionally anomalous body, perhaps remnant from a conti-
      The continuity of magnetic anomalies between the Antarctic                   nental collision in Proterozoic or early Paleozoic time
      and Australian coasts provides further evidence for the conti-               (Ferraccioli et al. 2011; An et al. 2015).
      nuity of these cratonic regions prior to the break-up of Gond-                  The mountain elevations are largely supported by crustal
      wana (Pappa and Ebbing 2021). The resulting ‘Mawson                          thicknesses of up to about 55 km (Hansen et al. 2010) (see
      Continent’ extends entirely across EA from the coast on the                  Fig. 5). Initial crustal thickening is likely to have occurred
      Australian side to just SE of the Weddell Embayment.                         through a compressional orogeny in the Neoproterozoic–
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

                                                        Seismic structure of the Antarctic upper mantle                                       201


                                                                                  event occurring at c. 500 Ma to explain the late-tectonic gran-
                                                                                  itoid intrusions found in Dronning Maud Land, consistent
                                                                                  with the seismic structure.
                                                                                     The Lambert Graben and other neighbouring regions to the
                                                                                  west represent an ancient terrane, with basement rocks ranging
                                                                                  from Archean to earliest Paleozoic (Fitzsimons 2000), which
                                                                                  also lacks thick continental lithosphere (Figs 6 & 7). Seismic
                                                                                  structures in this region show that high lithospheric velocities
                                                                                  are limited to depths of <75–100 km, suggesting the existence
                                                                                  of thin lithosphere, in contrast to surrounding regions where
                                                                                  high velocities extend to c. 200 km (Lloyd et al. 2020). The
                                                                                  Lambert Graben and corresponding rift structures in India
                                                                                  developed during Carboniferous–early Cretaceous extension
                                                                                  associated with the break-up of Gondwana (Phillips and Lau-
                                                                                  fer 2009). Xenolith suites from the Lambert Graben indicate a
                                                                                  transition from a relatively cold to a warmer geotherm that is
                                                                                  likely to have occurred during the late Paleozoic early rifting
                                                                                  stages and Mesozoic formation of the graben (Foley et al.
                                                                                  2006, 2021). Thus, mantle geodynamic processes associated
                                                                                  with this extension and rifting heated and destabilized the
                                                                                  existing Precambrian lithosphere, thinning or removing it.


                                                                                  Transantarctic Mountains and adjacent rifts

                                                                                  The TAMS are traditionally viewed as the tectonic boun-
                                                                                  dary between the thick Precambrian cratonic lithosphere
    Fig. 5. Crustal thickness of Antarctica. The map is based on an inversion
                                                                                  of EA and the Phanerozoic lithosphere domains of WA,
    of seismic receiver functions and Rayleigh-wave velocities by Shen et al.
    (2018b) in West Antarctica and central Antarctica, and on GOCE satellite
                                                                                  although there is some evidence that crust of EA afﬁnity
    gravity constraints over the entire continent (Pappa et al. 2019a). The
                                                                                  extends to the middle of the Ross Sea (Tinto et al. 2019).
    crustal thickness map based on gravity was corrected for a systematic         The 4000 km-long mountain range with peaks of up to
    crustal thickness offset with respect to the thicknesses derived from         c. 4000 m exhibits strong along-strike variations, varying
    seismology. The resulting corrected gravity-based map was averaged with       from a narrow, rift-shoulder-like orogeny in the central
    the seismic map in regions where the coverage overlapped. Abbreviations:      TAMS to broad, 400 km-wide, plateau-like elevated areas in
    AP, Antarctic Peninsula; EWM, Ellsworth–Whitmore Mountains; GSM,              the southernmost and northernmost segments. These varia-
    Gamburtsev Subglacial Mountains; LG, Lambert Graben; MBL, Marie               tions in topography reﬂect a complicated history of tectonism
    Byrd Land; RE, Ross Embayment; TAMS, Transantarctic Mountains;                along the TAMS, and correlate with changes in the underlying
    WARS, West Antarctic Rift System; WSE, Weddell Sea Embayment.                 upper-mantle structure, as imaged in the latest seismic models
                                                                                  (Shen et al. 2018a; Lloyd et al. 2020).
                                                                                     Seismic tomography reveals a band of slow velocities
    earliest Paleozoic, which is consistent with detrital zircon                  extending from the Macquarie Triple Junction, through the
    studies (van de Flierdt et al. 2008), with additional uplift asso-            volcanic Balleny Islands, the extinct Adare Trough spreading
    ciated with the extension of the Lambert Graben in the late                   centre and along the front of the TAMS (Fig. 6). This pattern
    Paleozoic–early Mesozoic related to the early stages of Gond-                 suggests that the TAMS and Terror Rift are part of a larger tec-
    wana break-up (Phillips and Laufer 2009; Maritati et al. 2020).               tonic system linked to mantle geodynamic processes, stretch-
    High elevations in this region are preserved through longer                   ing from the mid-ocean ridge to the southern TAMS. The
    periods of geological time due to low erosion rates (Heeszel                  Adare Trough, located just north of the Ross Embayment
    et al. 2013; Lloyd et al. 2013).                                              near the northern terminus of the TAMS, displays magnetic
       Much greater variability in lithospheric thickness is found                anomalies resulting from seaﬂoor spreading from 46 to
    beneath the highlands stretching from western Dronning                        26 Ma (Granot et al. 2013), with slow spreading continuing
    Maud Land to the Lambert Graben (Figs 6 & 7). Thinner lith-                   to 11 Ma and evidence of extensional faulting up to the present
    osphere, with thicknesses of the order of 100 km, is found                    (Granot and Dyment 2018). The western side of the Ross
    throughout much of this region. The uppermost mantle                          Embayment accommodated almost 100 km of extension
    beneath a portion of Dronning Maud Land is characterized                      from 40 to 26 Ma associated with plate motion between EA
    by an absence of fast lithosphere, despite rock ages that extend              and WA (Wilson and Luyendyk 2009; Granot et al. 2013;
    from the Mesoproterozoic to the Early Paleozoic. The absence                  Davey et al. 2016). Very slow extension and rift sedimentation
    of lithosphere in a region of Paleozoic or earlier age suggests               occurred since that time along the Terror Rift, which parallels
    that the lithosphere has been tectonically destabilized or                    the TAMS along the western Ross Embayment (Fielding et al.
    removed at a later time. Modest shear velocities at depths of                 2008; Martin and Cooper 2010; Granot and Dyment 2018).
    70–150 km suggest that the Precambrian-age lithosphere of                     The slow wave speeds show that the upper mantle retains
    this region has been removed, most likely by delamination                     warm uppermost mantle temperatures caused by an exten-
    (Lloyd et al. 2020). Unlike regions of Cenozoic delamination,                 sional tectonic environment despite the fact that tectonic
    which are characterized by low upper-mantle velocities as hot                 motion along this boundary has largely ceased, as shown by
    asthenosphere has replaced lithosphere (e.g. Levander et al.                  the absence of resolvable motion in GPS surveys (T. Wilson
    2011; Shen et al. 2018a), uppermost mantle velocities in                      pers. comm.). Anomalously warm upper-mantle temperatures
    this region are near the global average. Thus, the astheno-                   are also indicated for this region by mantle xenolith studies
    sphere that replaced the foundered lithosphere has already                    (e.g. Martin et al. 2021a).
    cooled, indicating a delamination event that occurred prior                      The northern section of the TAMS mostly constitutes the
    to the Cenozoic. Jacobs et al. (2008) suggested a delamination                highlands of northern Victoria Land (NVL). Surface- and
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

      202                                                                  D. A. Wiens et al.


                                                  0º
                  75 km                                                                  150 km




              90ºW                                                           90ºE




                                           180º
                                                                       −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6
                                                                         VS_Voigt anomaly (%)
                 250 km                                                                  350 km

                                                                                                     SSR
                                                                                                                                          LHB


                                                                                                     AP
                                                                                                           WE

                                                                                          BS
                                                                                                                                          LG

                                                                                                TI

                                                                                             AS                         RE
                                                                                                            MBL
                                                                                                                    RI

                                                                                                                   AT
                                                                                                                                    BI

                                                                                                                         MTJ


      Fig. 6. Tomographic images of the shear-wave velocity structure of seismic model ANT-20 at depths of 75, 150, 250 and 350 km from Lloyd et al. (2020).
      Bathymetry and bedrock topography contours for 1000 m (thin white line) and −500 m (thin brown line), as well as −2500 m (thin dark grey line) in the oceans
      are also shown (Fretwell et al. 2013). Abbreviations: AT, Adare Trough; AS, Amundsen Sea; AP, Antarctic Peninsula; BI, Balleny Islands; BS,
      Bellingshausen Sea; LG, Lambert Graben; LHB, Lützow-Holm Bay; MTJ, Macquarie Triple Junction; MBL, Marie Byrd Land; RE, Ross Embayment; RI,
      Ross Island; SSR, South Scotia Ridge; TI, Thurston Island; WE, Weddell Embayment.


      body-wave tomography using a regional temporary seismic                           low mantle seismic attenuation in EA and high mantle attenu-
      array revealed that a slow-velocity anomaly in the upper man-                     ation beneath Ross Island and the Terror Rift (Lawrence et al.
      tle between Moho and 150 km depth is located near the coast-                      2006b). The slow wave speeds in this region are consistent
      line of NVL (Hansen et al. 2015; Graw et al. 2016; Brenn et al.                   with the general absence of lithosphere and the high upper-
      2017). The continental-scale model from Lloyd et al. (2020)                       mantle temperatures expected beneath a recently extending
      shows a large slow-velocity region in the uppermost mantle                        rift zone with a small amount of continuing decompression
      beneath the high elevations of northernmost Victoria Land                         melting.
      and the adjacent areas of the Ross Embayment that connect                            Active volcanism along the western coast of the Ross
      the Balleny Islands to the north and Ross Island to the south                     Embayment, mostly over the past 10 myr, extends from the
      (Fig. 6). This extended region of low velocity in the upper                       northernmost tip of the coastline to just south of Ross Island
      mantle implies a strong thermal contribution to the uplift of                     (Kyle 1990). A mantle plume origin has been proposed for
      NVL.                                                                              Mount Erebus, on Ross Island, based largely on petrological
         Detailed body- and surface-wave tomography using tempo-                        and geochemical data (Kyle et al. 1992; Phillips et al.
      rary seismic stations shows a sharp boundary between slow                         2018), although other studies associate the volcanism with
      and fast upper mantle, near the crest of the TAMS near Ross                       mantle metasomatism from the long subduction history in
      Island (Lawrence et al. 2006a; Watson et al. 2006; Brenn                          this region (Day et al. 2019; Martin et al. 2021b). Adjoint
      et al. 2017; Shen et al. 2018b; White-Gaynor et al. 2019).                        tomography shows that Ross Island is underlain by a promi-
      There is also a sharp boundary along the TAMS between                             nent slow-velocity anomaly extending down to the 410 km
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

                                                              Seismic structure of the Antarctic upper mantle                                                   203


                         0º                                                             (Stump et al. 1980). Notably, recently found volcanic rocks
                                                                                        in glacial deposits show ages of 25–17 Ma and can be traced




                                                                      60
                                                                        ºS
                                                                                        to a magnetic anomaly 400 km into EA (Licht et al. 2018).
                                                                                        Both the topographic and volcanic features pose difﬁculties
                                   DML                                                  to the ﬂexural rift-shoulder mountain model as its support
                                                                                        (see Paxman 2021 for a discussion of uplift mechanisms).




                                                     70
                                                                                           Using surface-wave tomography, Heeszel et al. (2016)




                                                       ºS
                                                                                        found a slow uppermost mantle beneath the southern TAMS
                                                                                        region. They hypothesized that the slow anomaly was either
                                                                                        due to the reheating from the WARS activity related to the Ter-
                                                                                        ror Rift to the north, or evidence of a Cenozoic lithospheric
                                                                LG                      delamination or destruction event. Shen et al. (2018a) further
                                                                                        improved the images by combining data from Heeszel et al.
                                          GSM
                                                                       90ºE
                                                                                        (2016) together with short-period surface-wave velocity
                                                                                        maps from ambient noise and receiver functions. The updated
                                                                                        images show a low-velocity zone beneath the southern TAMS
                                                                                        in the uppermost mantle (Fig. 8) on top of a dipping high-
                                                                                        velocity zone (Fig. 9). They suggested that the deeper high-
                              TA




                                                                                        velocity zone represents a foundering lithosphere and the
                                M
                                 S




                                                                                        LVZ represents an upwelling asthenosphere, and the system
                       RE                                                               is best interpreted by a lithosphere removal model (Shen
                                                                                        et al. 2018a). Beneath the Thiel Mountains and Whitmore
                                                                                        Mountains, the same study also identiﬁed an additional low
                                                                                        seismic anomaly in the uppermost mantle, indicative of a ther-
                                                                                        mal origin for these elevated areas in WA.
                                                                                           Although Shen et al. (2018a) showed that the lithosphere
                                                                                        has been removed in the southern TAMS region and provided
                         180º
                                                                                        an estimate of the contribution to uplift from the mantle ther-
                                                                                        mal effect due to the lithosphere removal, it is also clear that
           60     80     100     120    140     160     180     200   220               the TAMS is complicated and signiﬁcant along-strike varia-
                            Lithospheric thickness (km)                                 tion exists. Proposed uplift mechanisms for the TAMS include
                                                                                        ﬂexural uplift (ten Brink et al. 1997; Yamasaki et al. 2008;
    Fig. 7. Lithospheric thickness of East Antarctica based on the ANT-20               Wannamaker et al. 2017), thermal mantle support (Lawrence
    seismic model (Lloyd et al. 2020). Lithospheric thickness was calculated            et al. 2006c; Brenn et al. 2017), and crustal thickness and den-
    from velocity proﬁles assuming that the bottom of the lithosphere is                sity variations (Bialas et al. 2007; Huerta 2007). As an
    located at the depth of the maximum negative velocity gradient above the
    low-velocity zone (van der Lee 2002). Geographical labels are the same as
    in Figure 5.



    discontinuity but anomalies beneath this are low amplitude
    and indistinct (Lloyd et al. 2020). P-wave travel-time tomog-
    raphy also shows prominent upper-mantle slow-velocity
    anomalies but the anomalies diverge laterally in the transition
    zone (Hansen et al. 2014; White-Gaynor et al. 2019). This
    does not necessarily eliminate the plume model, since geody-
    namical modelling suggests that plumes may be highly tilted
    in the mid-mantle (Bredow and Steinberger 2021). Emry
    et al. (2020), using receiver functions, found that the mantle
    transition zone was anomalously thin near Mount Erebus
    and along the adjacent TAMS, suggesting a warm thermal
    anomaly in the transition zone. French and Romanowicz
    (2015), in a global tomographic study, showed little anomaly
    in the transition zone, a signiﬁcant slow anomaly at depths of
    800–1200 km and no anomalies in the lower mantle (Phillips
    et al. 2018). Thus, it is clear that the region is underlain by a
    signiﬁcant thermal anomaly in the upper mantle but the exis-
    tence of a classic mantle plume arising near the core–mantle
    boundary remains uncertain.
       The southern section of the TAMS shows some unusual
    characteristics compared with other sections of the TAM.
                                                                                        Fig. 8. Average VS in the uppermost 50 km of the mantle beneath central
    First, unlike the nearby central TAMS where the exposed
                                                                                        Antarctica, showing the absence of cold, fast mantle lithosphere beneath
    high mountains are only c. 100 km wide, the southern                                the Transantarctic Mountains (Shen et al. 2018a). Black lines indicate the
    TAMS has a plateau-like elevated region extending into EA                           locations of the two vertical proﬁles shown in Figure 9. A small open box
    for c. 400 km. Secondly, unlike the central and northern                            marks the approximate location of the Mount Early and Sheridan Bluff
    TAMS where volcanic rocks are only found on the West Ant-                           volcanism. The Ellsworth–Whitmore Mountains (EWM), the
    arctic Rift (WARS) side of the high mountains, Miocene-age                          Transantarctic Mountains (TAMS) and the Ross Embayment (RE) are
    (c. 20–15 Ma) volcanics at Sheridan Bluff and Mount                                 labelled. Lines A–A′ and B–B′ denote the location of the cross-sections
    Early (Fig. 8) are all located on the EA side of the peaks                          shown in Figure 9.
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

      204                                                                                    D. A. Wiens et al.


                   (a)                                                                                 (b)




                                                                                                                                                                                             Mantle Vs perturbation (%)
                                    A                                                        A                            B                                                        B’
             Topo. (m)




                                                                                                 Depth (km) Topo. (m)
                                                         TAMS                                                                                 WM TM
                             1500       RE                                                                        1500         WARS                                                      4
                                0                                                                                    0
                                0                                                                                    0
                               20                                                                                   20                                                                   2
                               40                                                                                   40
                     Depth (km)

                               60                                                                                   60
                               80                                                                                   80
                              100                                                                                  100                                                                   0
                              120                                                                                  120
                              140                                                                                  140
                              160                                                                                  160
                              180                                                                                  180                                                                   2
                              200                                                                                  200
                              220                                                                                  220
                              240                                                                                  240                                                                   4
                                    0        2      4          6       8            10                                    0        2          4          6        8        10
                                                        Distance (°)                                                                              Distance (°)
                   (c)                                                                           (d)                                                                                    4.4
                                                         TAMS                                                                                 WM TM




                                                                                                   Depth (km) Topo. (m)




                                                                                                                                                                                              Crustal Vs (km s–1)
                                                                                                                                                                                        4.2
                       Topo. (m)




                             1500    RE                                                                            1500        WARS
                                0                                                                                     0                                                                 4.0
                                0                                                                                     0
                               20                                                                                    20
                               40 Cooling Litho                                                                      40                                                                 3.8
              Depth (km)




                               60                                                                                    60
                               80                                                                                    80                                          East Antarctica        3.6
                              100                                              East Antarctica                      100
                              120                                                   Litho                           120       Asthenosphere                           Litho
                              140                                                                                   140                                                                 3.4
                              160   Asthenosphere                                                                   160
                              180                             Foundering                                            180                       Foundering                                3.2
                              200                                Litho                                              200                          Litho
                              220                                                                                   220
                              240                                                                                   240                                                                 3.0
                                  0        2        4          6           8        10                                    0         2         4          6        8         10
                                                    Distance (°)                                                                                  Distance (°)

      Fig. 9. Cross-sections beneath the southern Transantarctic Mountains and Whitmore Mountains along lines A–A′ and B–B′ in Figure 8, from Shen et al.
      (2018a). (a) and (b) show VSV, and (c) and (d) show the corresponding interpretation. The elevation of the solid Earth surface in metres is shown above each
      plot. VSV in the crust is plotted as an absolute value, and VSV in the mantle is plotted as the per cent perturbation relative to the averaged 1D VSV structure of the
      study region. Geographical features are marked by abbreviations: RE, Ross Embayment; TAMS, Transantarctic Mountains; TM, Thiel Mountains; WARS,
      West Antarctic Rift System; WM, Whitmore Mountains.



      example of along-strike variation, a recent magnetotelluric                                                         reference velocity (Figs 4, 6, 10 & 11). Mantle seismic veloc-
      (MT) study by Wannamaker et al. (2017) showed that in the                                                           ities increase eastwards across the Ross Embayment, consis-
      central TAM, cratonic lithosphere extends nearly up to the                                                          tent with the increase in lithospheric age from the late
      TAMS range front. Cantilevered ﬂexural uplift appears to be                                                         Cenozoic rifting in the western Ross Embayment (Fielding
      the preferred uplift mechanism and the thermal contribution                                                         et al. 2008) to early Cenozoic and Cretaceous lithosphere in
      from the mantle seems smaller in this region. These differ-                                                         the east (Wilson and Luyendyk 2009). Although aerogeophys-
      ences between the southern and central TAMS are consistent                                                          ical evidence suggests that the boundary between crust of EA
      with the range morphology, in which the southern TAMS                                                               and WA afﬁnities occurs in the middle of the Ross Embay-
      form a large plateau area, whereas the central TAMS form a                                                          ment (Tinto et al. 2019), from a seismic structure and tectonics
      much narrower mountain range. Indeed, such structural and                                                           standpoint the boundary occurs along the TAMS. Detailed
      morphological variability is evident along the full length of                                                       surface-wave results show that the structure of the WARS con-
      the TAMS (Shen et al. 2018a; Lloyd et al. 2020).                                                                    sists of higher-velocity lithospheric mantle extending to
                                                                                                                          depths of about 70–80 km, with lower velocities beneath
                                                                                                                          (Heeszel et al. 2016; O’Donnell et al. 2017; Shen et al.
      West Antarctica                                                                                                     2018b), consistent with cooling since the major extensional
                                                                                                                          episodes during the Mesozoic and early Cenozoic (Siddoway
      The upper-mantle structure of WA is broadly similar to other                                                        2008; Granot et al. 2013). Some smaller regions show lower
      regions worldwide that have experienced Mesozoic and Ceno-                                                          velocities, possibly delineating the locus of limited late Ceno-
      zoic tectonic activity, such as western North America. This                                                         zoic extension (Lloyd et al. 2015). The Weddell Sea and areas
      structure includes shallow Moho depth (Fig. 5), thin litho-                                                         beneath the Ronne Ice Shelf show upper-mantle velocities that
      sphere and slow upper-mantle shear wave velocities in many                                                          are intermediate between the fast EA lithosphere and the lower
      places (Fig. 6). These characteristics are consistent with the                                                      velocities in other regions of WA (Figs 6 & 11). This is con-
      geological history of WA, which includes rifting in the Wed-                                                        sistent with the age of the lithosphere in this region, dating
      dell Sea Embayment (Jordan et al. 2017) as well as the rotation                                                     to the Mesozoic opening of Gondwana (Jordan et al. 2013;
      and translation of the Ellsworth–Whitmore Mountain block                                                            2017).
      during the Jurassic (Grunow et al. 1987), and Cretaceous                                                               Shear-wave splitting measurements indicate large shear-
      extension between the WA crustal block and Zealandia (e.g.                                                          wave splitting times (>1 s) in the southern WARS (Fig. 2).
      Siddoway 2008; Wobbe et al. 2012). The latter events culmi-                                                         The splitting measurements show very consistent fast direc-
      nated in the regional cessation of subduction along the margin                                                      tions approximately perpendicular to the strike of the nearby
      of Marie Byrd Land. However, subduction continued from                                                              Whitmore Mountains and other topographical features, and
      Thurston Island to the Antarctic Peninsula, where it gradually                                                      parallel to likely extension directions for the WARS opening.
      ceased from south to north during the Cenozoic (Eagles et al.                                                       This strong upper-mantle azimuthal anisotropy is interpreted
      2004). The extended continental crust of the WARS under-                                                            as resulting from lattice-preferred orientation induced by
      went further episodes of focused extension during the Ceno-                                                         asthenospheric mantle strain associated with Cenozoic exten-
      zoic (Granot et al. 2013; Davey et al. 2016).                                                                       sion of the WARS (Accardo et al. 2014).
         The eastern Ross Embayment, central WA and the Weddell                                                              Marie Byrd Land (MBL), an elevated volcanic dome with
      Sea show modest upper-mantle velocity anomalies, with                                                               18 major subaerial shield and stratovolcanoes (LeMasurier
      velocities about 1–2% slower than the global average                                                                and Rex 1989), is underlain by low mantle velocities (Figs 6
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

                                                        Seismic structure of the Antarctic upper mantle                                                     205




                                                                                                                 Fig. 10. Comparison of P-wave travel-time
                                                                                                                 tomography (Hansen et al. 2014) with
                                                                                                                 adjoint waveform tomography (Lloyd et al.
                                                                                                                 2020) results for a proﬁle across the
                                                                                                                 Amundsen Sea (AS), Marie Byrd Land
                                                                                                                 (MBL), the West Antarctic Rift System
                                                                                                                 (WARS) and the Whitmore Mountains
                                                                                                                 (WM), along line F in Figure 11. The images
                                                                                                                 show generally similar features in areas
                                                                                                                 below the continent with good P-wave
                                                                                                                 ray-path coverage (below MBL and East
                                                                                                                 Antarctica) but anomalies are missing from
                                                                                                                 the P-wave model in regions with little
                                                                                                                 ray-path coverage, such as the Amundsen
                                                                                                                 Sea coast. Both models show that
                                                                                                                 slow-velocity anomalies beneath the Marie
                                                                                                                 Byrd Land dome continue into the lower
                                                                                                                 mantle, consistent with a mantle plume origin
                                                                                                                 for the topography and volcanism.




    & 10). Late Quaternary alkaline volcanism at Mount Berlin                        than the surrounding regions (c. 25–28 km) but this is not suf-
    and Mount Takahae (Wilch et al. 1999), and an inferred sub-                      ﬁcient to explain the elevated topography, suggesting that the
    glacial magmatic system near Mount Waesche (Lough et al.                         elevation is partially supported by a low-density thermal
    2013), demonstrate current volcanic activity. The crustal                        anomaly in the uppermost mantle (Chaput et al. 2014; Shen
    thickness of about 30–33 km (Fig. 5) is somewhat greater                         et al. 2018a). Several previous studies have proposed a mantle




    Fig. 11. Images of shear-wave speed structure beneath West Antarctica at 75 km depth and along proﬁles D, E and F from Lloyd et al. (2020). Horizontal and
    vertical slices have a shear-wave speed range of ±6 and ±2%, respectively. The horizontal slice depicts broadband seismic stations, wave-speed anomalies,
    bathymetry and topography as in Figure 6. Abbreviations: AS, Amundsen Sea; ASE, Amundsen Sea Embayment; AP, Antarctic Peninsula; BS,
    Bellingshausen Sea; EWM, Ellsworth–Whitmore Mountains; MBL, Marie Byrd Land; TAMS, Transantarctic Mountains; TI, Thurston Island; WARS, West
    Antarctic Rift System; WSE, Weddell Sea Embayment; WM, Whitmore Mountains.
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

      206                                                              D. A. Wiens et al.


      plume origin for the MBL dome, based on the elevated topog-                  Antarctica (Eagles et al. 2004), where an extensive shallow
      raphy and volcano chemistry and petrology (Hole and LeMa-                    bathymetric anomaly is found (Wobbe et al. 2014). The seis-
      surier 1994; LeMasurier and Landis 1996; Behrendt 1999;                      mic and bathymetric anomalies may result from warm upper
      Panter et al. 2000). Subaerial volcanic peaks are located                    mantle near the region where spreading originated between
      along linear arrays, in many cases with age progressions, but                Zealandia and Antarctica, in which the initiation of spreading
      directions of propagation are not consistent between differ-                 has been attributed to a mantle plume (Weaver et al. 1994).
      ence lines, suggesting that the linear trends may be controlled              The presence of low-viscosity hydrous mantle material result-
      by pre-existing fractures (LeMasurier and Rex 1989; Paulsen                  ing from the long-lived Mesozoic subduction zone that pre-
      and Wilson 2010) rather than relative motion between the Ant-                ceded the rifting along the northern Antarctic margin may
      arctic Plate and the mantle plume. As an alternative to the                  also play a role (Finn et al. 2005; Sutherland et al. 2010).
      mantle plume model, Finn et al. (2005) proposed that much                       Slow seismic anomalies beneath the Antarctic Peninsula are
      of the volcanism of WA results from the volatile-enhanced                    limited to depths of <200 km, and are underlain by fast veloc-
      melting of metasomatized lithosphere formed during Meso-                     ities, in contrast to MBL and the Amundsen Sea regions
      zoic subduction along this margin.                                           (Fig. 11). This region was the site of subduction of the Phoenix
          Both body-wave (Hansen et al. 2014; Lloyd et al. 2015) and               Plate beneath Antarctica during the Mesozoic, with subduc-
      surface-wave (Heeszel et al. 2016; Shen et al. 2018b) tomog-                 tion ending from south to north during the Cenozoic as the
      raphy studies show low velocities in the upper mantle beneath                Phoenix–Antarctic spreading centre was subducted (Eagles
      the MBL dome. The surface-wave results show the existence                    et al. 2004). The fast velocities found in the transition zone
      of a higher-velocity mantle lithosphere to depths of 60–80 km,               beneath the northern peninsula may represent the remnants
      underlain by lower seismic velocities. Methods with good sen-                of the subducted Phoenix slab. As the subducting ridge tra-
      sitivity to mid-mantle depths generally show low-velocity                    versed northwards along the peninsula, it formed a slab win-
      anomalies beneath the MBL dome in the transition zone and                    dow in its wake. Slab windows are generally accompanied
      upper part of the lower mantle. Figure 10 compares the results               by erosion of the overriding plate lithosphere and its replace-
      from P-wave tomography (Hansen et al. 2014) and adjoint                      ment with hot upwelling asthenosphere (Groome and Thorkel-
      tomography (Lloyd et al. 2020), with both results showing                    son 2009). We interpret the slow seismic velocities extending
      low velocities in the mid-mantle beneath the MBL dome.                       along the entire length of the western margin of the peninsula
      The P-wave tomography has almost no resolution of the                        as due to the effects of the slab window, consistent with the
      coastal and oceanic regions due to a lack of seismic stations                location and limited depth extent of the anomalies.
      resulting in poor ray-path coverage but the adjoint tomo-                       The slow mantle velocities beneath MBL, the Amundsen
      graphy, which has good resolution, shows that the low                        Sea Embayment and the Antarctic Peninsula imply warm
      upper-mantle velocities extend past the MBL coastline to a                   upper-mantle temperatures, with important implications for
      low-velocity anomaly at depths of 150–350 km beneath the                     ice sheet models and projections of the future of the Antarctic
      Amundsen Sea.                                                                ice sheet. Heat-ﬂow estimates, based on the seismic structure,
          The tomography results are consistent with a thermal plume               show relatively high geothermal heat ﬂux in these regions
      extending at least from the mid-mantle to the surface beneath                (Shen et al. 2020), inﬂuencing water production and drag at
      MBL. The velocity anomalies are most easily interpreted in                   the base of the ice sheet (Pollard et al. 2005; Pattyn 2010).
      terms of warmer mantle temperatures, as the effects of water                 Warm mantle temperatures also imply low mantle viscosity,
      on seismic velocities are uncertain and recent laboratory                    which predicts short glacial isostatic adjustment timescales
      results suggest that water has an insigniﬁcant effect on upper-              that may have important inﬂuences on the evolution of the
      mantle seismic velocities (Cline et al. 2018). The magnitude of              Antarctic ice sheet (Gomez et al. 2015; Whitehouse et al.
      the shear velocity anomaly is consistent with a 150°C upper-                 2019). The relationship between Antarctic seismic structure,
      mantle thermal anomaly, which can explain the excess topog-                  mantle viscosity and glacial isostatic adjustment is discussed
      raphy (Lloyd et al. 2015). The continuity of the slow-velocity               further in Ivins et al. (In press).
      anomalies from depths of 80 to 800 km is highly suggestive of
      a mantle plume originating from the mid-mantle or deeper,
      which is consistent with geochemical evidence (e.g. Panter
      et al. 2000; Handler et al. 2021). However, the connection                   Conclusions and prospects for future work
      between the MBL anomaly and the offshore anomaly, as
      well as the diverse geographical trends of the volcanic lines,               The deployment of numerous seismic stations and the devel-
      suggest the possibility of a more complicated geodynamical                   opment of new seismic analysis tools over the last two decades
      situation than indicated by the classical simple vertical                    have led to great improvements in our knowledge of the upper-
      plume model. Simulations of mantle plumes in global mantle-                  mantle structure beneath Antarctica. Analysis of empirical
      ﬂow models suggest that plumes originating at the edge of the                Green’s functions from ambient noise correlation allows
      Paciﬁc Large Low Shear Velocity Province (LLSVP) at the                      much better resolution of surface-wave dispersion curves at
      core–mantle boundary beneath the South Paciﬁc would be                       short periods. Bayesian Monte Carlo inversion methods can
      tilted southwards by the large-scale mantle ﬂow pattern, pos-                be used to determine the structure that best ﬁts constraints
      sibly explaining the MBL and offshore seismic anomalies                      from multiple types of seismic data, and also provide uncer-
      (Bredow and Steinberger 2021).                                               tainty estimates. Adjoint inversion methods, combined with
          Slow upper-mantle velocity anomalies extend along the                    numerical calculations of full waveform synthetic seismo-
      coast from MBL through the Amundsen Sea Embayment                            grams in 3D structures, allows the determination of higher-
      and northwards to the tip of the Antarctic Peninsula                         resolution structure models of the entire Antarctic continent
      (Fig. 11). Along the MBL and Amundsen Sea coastlines,                        and surrounding regions throughout the upper mantle and
      slow velocities extend from the bottom of the thin lithosphere               transition zone.
      (70 km) to about 200 km depth, beneath late Pleistocene–                        Seismic structure models calculated with these methods
      recent volcanoes such as Mount Siple in MBL (Wilch et al.                    now have sufﬁcient resolution to provide important insights
      1999) and Mount Hudson (Corr and Vaughan 2008) near                          into the geological history of the continent. EA shows thick
      the Amundsen Sea Embayment. The anomalies deepen to                          continental mantle lithosphere similar to Archean and Early
      150–300 km depth offshore beneath 90 Ma oceanic litho-                       Proterozoic terranes on other continents. The fast shear veloc-
      sphere formed during the separation of Zealandia from                        ities of the lithosphere down to >200 km depth are interpreted
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

                                                     Seismic structure of the Antarctic upper mantle                                                207


    as resulting from cold mantle temperatures, and to a lesser                techniques will also increase the resolution of isotropic struc-
    extent from chemical depletion, based on studies from other                tural variations. Double difference tomography, which uses
    cratonic regions. The deepest and largest lithospheric velocity            the differences in waveforms from the same earthquake
    anomalies occur along a band extending almost entirely across              recorded at different seismic stations, will improve resolution
    Antarctica 500–1000 km inboard from the TAM, probably                      on the Antarctic continent by localizing the structure kernels in
    representing a ‘Mawson Continent’ that formed the core of                  the vicinity of the stations (Yuan et al. 2016). The incorpora-
    ancient cratonic lithosphere around which other terranes                   tion of Green’s functions from ambient noise cross-correlation
    accreted. Some other regions of EA, notably the Dronning                   into adjoint tomography will also increase resolution (Chen
    Maud Land highlands and the Lambert Graben region, show                    et al. 2014; Liu et al. 2017). With the continued improvement
    much thinner lithosphere, indicating thermal modiﬁcation of                of datasets and analysis methods, future seismic studies of the
    the lithosphere during the Phanerozoic.                                    Antarctic mantle will provide important new insights into the
       The TAMS front represents a major boundary in the mantle                geological history and current geodynamic processes of
    between thick cratonic lithosphere in EA and much thinner                  Antarctica.
    lithosphere in WA. In the Ross Embayment region, it is
    ﬂanked by the late Cenozoic rifts, which are underlain by an
    extensive low-velocity upper-mantle anomaly extending                      Acknowledgements We thank the many individuals and organi-
    from the mid-ocean ridges north of Antarctica to the southern              zations who have helped with the installation and maintenance of
    TAM. This velocity anomaly results from warm mantle along                  Antarctic seismic stations through the years. The seismic instruments
    the trace of the rift, which persists even though extension has            were provided by the Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismol-
    now apparently ceased. The TAMS show major structural var-                 ogy (IRIS) through the PASSCAL Polar Support Services. We thank
    iations along-strike, with the broad southern TAMS underlain               Anya Reading, Fausto Ferraccioli, Adam Martin and Wouter van der
    at shallow mantle depths by low seismic velocities indicating              Wal for helpful comments on an earlier draft.
                                                                                  The portable instrumentation and data management facilities of the
    an absence of lithospheric mantle, consistent with uplift as a
                                                                               IRIS Consortium are supported by the National Science Foundation’s
    result of lithospheric removal. In contrast, the much narrower
                                                                               Seismological Facilities for the Advancement of Geoscience (SAGE)
    central TAMS is underlain by a sharp boundary between slow                 Award under Cooperative Support Agreement OPP-1851037.
    WA and fast EA mantle, consistent with classical rift-shoulder
    or ﬂexural uplift models.
       The upper-mantle seismic structure of WA is dominated by
    large slow-velocity anomalies beneath central MBL, and                     Author contributions DAW: conceptualization (lead), funding
    along the Paciﬁc coastline from MBL through the Antarctic                  acquisition (lead), investigation (equal), methodology (equal), project
    Peninsula. The central MBL anomaly extends through the                     administration (lead), resources (lead), software (supporting), super-
    transition zone, and may represent the thermal anomaly result-             vision (lead), validation (equal), visualization (equal), writing – orig-
    ing from a mantle plume. Slow velocities beneath the Amund-                inal draft (lead), writing – review & editing (lead); WS:
    sen Sea coast link to deeper anomalies offshore, suggesting a              conceptualization (supporting), data curation (lead), formal analysis
                                                                               (lead), funding acquisition (supporting), investigation (equal), meth-
    connection with deeper mantle processes to the north. Slow
                                                                               odology (equal), project administration (supporting), resources (sup-
    anomalies beneath the Antarctic Peninsula are limited to                   porting), software (lead), validation (equal), visualization (equal),
    depths <200 km, and are likely to represent thermal anomalies              writing – original draft (supporting), writing – review & editing (sup-
    resulting from the erosion of continental lithosphere and                  porting); AJL: conceptualization (supporting), data curation (lead),
    replacement by warm mantle during subduction of the Antarc-                formal analysis (lead), funding acquisition (supporting), investigation
    tic–Phoenix spreading centre.                                              (equal), methodology (equal), project administration (supporting),
       Continuing work over the next decade should result in                   resources (supporting), software (lead), validation (equal), visualiza-
    higher-resolution seismic images of the mantle structure due               tion (lead), writing – original draft (supporting), writing – review &
    to improvements in both data collection and seismic analysis.              editing (supporting).
    Technological improvements should permit the deployment of
    denser arrays of seismic stations, as well as deployment of sta-
    tions in regions without previous instrumentation. The devel-              Funding This work was funded by the United States National Sci-
    opment of much smaller and lighter autonomous seismic                      ence Foundation with grants PLR-1246712, OPP-1744883, OPP-
    stations with more reliable power supplies should facilitate               1744889 and OPP-1945693 awarded to D.A. Wiens, and grant
    deployment in remote parts of the continent. Better and lower-             OPP-1945856 awarded to W. Shen.
    cost satellite communications should allow real-time transmis-
    sion of seismic data from remote sites, and should also reduce
    the cost of operation by reducing the need for maintenance vis-            Data availability Original data can be obtained from the IRIS
    its. An international effort is needed to instrument the vast              Data Management Center (http://ds.iris.edu/ds/nodes/dmc/data/).
    regions of EA that are so far without any seismograph                      The shear-wave velocity structures of the Bayesian Monte-Carlo
    deployments.                                                               and adjoint ANT‐20 models can be obtained through the Incorporated
       Improvements in data analysis will also allow advances to               Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS) Earth Model Collabora-
    take place using existing data. Surface-wave data can be ana-              tion (http://ds.iris.edu/ds/products/emc/).
    lysed to yield better constraints on anisotropy. Combined anal-
    ysis of Love and Rayleigh waves will yield estimates on the
    variations in radial seismic anisotropy, the difference between            References
    vertically and horizontally polarized shear waves (O’Donnell
    et al. 2019b; Zhou et al. 2019). Analysis of Rayleigh-wave                 Accardo, N.J., Wiens, D.A. et al. 2014. Upper mantle seismic anisot-
    phase velocities for azimuthal anisotropy will allow resolution                ropy beneath the West Antarctic Rift System and surrounding
    of the depth distribution of azimuthal anisotropy, which is                    region from shear wave splitting analysis. Geophysical Journal
    poorly constrained by SKS analysis. The resulting maps of                      International, 198, 414–429, https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/
    the lateral and depth distribution of azimuthal anisotropy                     ggu117
    will provide important constraints on the distribution and                 Ammon, C. 1991. The isolation of receiver effects from teleseismic P
    orientation of mantle fabric due to either past tectonic pro-                  waveforms. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America,
    cesses or to current mantle deformation and ﬂow. Improved                      81, 2504–2510.
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

      208                                                              D. A. Wiens et al.


      An, M., Wiens, D.A. et al. 2015. S-velocity model and inferred Moho               Marie Byrd Land, West Antarctica. Geological Society, London,
           topography beneath the Antarctic Plate from Rayleigh waves.                  Memoirs, 56, https://doi.org/10.1144/M56-2020-16
           Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 120, 359–383,             Chen, M., Huang Yao, H., van der Hilst, R. and Niu, F. 2014. Low
           https://doi.org/10.1002/2014JB011332                                         wave speed zones in the crust beneath SE Tibet revealed by
      Anandakrishnan, A., Voigt, D.E., Burkett, P.G. and Henry, R. 2000.                ambient noise adjoint tomography. Geophysical Research Let-
           Deployment of a broadband seismic network in west Antarctica.                ters, 41, 334–340, https://doi.org/10.1002/2013GL058476
           Geophysical Research Letters, 27, 2053–2056, https://doi.org/           Cline, C.J., Faul, U.H., David, E.C., Berry, A.J. and Jackson, I. 2018.
           10.1029/1999GL011189                                                         Redox-inﬂuenced seismic properties of upper-mantle olivine.
      Baker, M.G., Aster, R.C. et al. 2019. Seasonal and spatial variations             Nature, 555, 355–358, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25764
           in the ocean-coupled ambient waveﬁeld of the Ross Ice Shelf.            Corr, H.F. and Vaughan, D.G. 2008. A recent volcanic eruption
           Journal of Glaciology, 65, 912–925, https://doi.org/10.1017/                 beneath the West Antarctic ice sheet. Nature Geoscience, 1,
           jog.2019.64                                                                  122–125, https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo106
      Bannister, S., Yu, J., Leitner, B. and Kennett, B.L.N. 2003. Variations      Danesi, S. and Morelli, A. 2001. Structure of the upper mantle under
           in crustal structure across the transition from West to East Ant-            the Antarctic Plate from surface wave tomography. Geophysical
           arctica, Southern Victoria Land. Geophysical Journal Interna-                Research Letters, 28, 4395–4398, https://doi.org/10.1029/
           tional, 155, 870–884, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-246X.                   2001GL013431
           2003.02094.x                                                            Davey, F.J., Granot, R., Cande, S.C., Stock, J.M., Selvans, M. and
      Barklage, M., Wiens, D.A., Nyblade, A. and Anandakrishnan, S.                     Ferraccioli, F. 2016. Synchronous oceanic spreading and conti-
           2009. Upper mantle seismic anisotropy of South Victoria Land                 nental rifting in West Antarctica. Geophysical Research Letters,
           and the Ross Sea coast, Antarctica from SKS and SKKS splitting               43, 6162–6169, https://doi.org/10.1002/2016GL069087
           analysis. Geophysical Journal International, 178, 729–741,              Day, J.M.D., Harvey, R.P. and Hilton, D.R. 2019. Melt-modiﬁed lith-
           https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-246X.2009.04158.x                             osphere beneath Ross Island and its role in the tectono-magmatic
      Bayer, B., Muller, C., Eaton, D.W. and Jokat, W. 2007. Seismic                    evolution of the West Antarctic Rift System. Chemical Geology,
           anisotropy beneath Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica, revealed                  518, 45–54, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemgeo.2019.04.012
           by shear wave splitting. Geophysical Journal International,             Eagles, G., Gohl, K. and Larter, R.D. 2004. High-resolution animated
           171, 339–351, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-246X.2007.03519.x               tectonic reconstruction of the South Paciﬁc and West Antarctic
      Behrendt, J.C. 1999. Crustal and lithospheric structure of the West               margin. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 5, Q07004,
           Antarctic Rift System from geophysical investigations – a                    https://doi.org/10.1029/2003GC000657
           review. Global and Planetary Change, 23, 25–44.                         Emry, E.L., Nyblade, A.A. et al. 2015. The mantle transition zone
      Bentley, C. 1973. Crustal structure of Antarctica. Tectonophysics, 20,            beneath West Antarctica: seismic evidence for hydration and
           229–240, https://doi.org/10.1016/0040-1951(73)90112-1                        thermal upwellings. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems,
      Bernacchi, L.C. and Milne, J. 1908. Earthquakes and other earth                   15, 40–58, https://doi.org/10.1002/2014GC005588
           movements recorded in the Antarctic regions, 1902–1903. In:             Emry, E.L., Nyblade, A.A. et al. 2020. Prominent thermal anomalies
           National Antarctic Expedition 1901–1904. Physical Observa-                   in the mantle transition zone beneath the Transantarctic
           tions. The Royal Society, London, 37–96.                                     Mountains. Geology, 48, 748–752, https://doi.org/10.1130/
      Bialas, R.W., Buck, W.R., Studinger, M. and Fitzgerald, P.G. 2007.                G47346.1
           Plateau collapse model for the Transantarctic Mountains–West            Ferraccioli, F., Finn, C.A., Jordan, T.A., Bell, R.E., Anderson, L.M.
           Antarctic Rift System: insights from numerical experiments.                  and Damaske, D. 2011. East Antarctic rifting triggers uplift
           Geology, 35, 687–690, https://doi.org/10.1130/G23825A.1                      of the Gamburtsev Mountains. Nature, 479, 388–392, https://
      Bina, C.R. and Helffrich, G. 1994. Phase transition Clapeyron slopes              doi.org/10.1038/nature10566
           and transition zone seismic discontinuity topography. Journal           Fielding, C.R., Whittaker, J., Henrys, S.A., Wilson, T.J. and Naish,
           of Geophysical Research, 99, 15853–15860, https://doi.org/                   T.R. 2008. Seismic facies and stratigraphy of the Cenozoic
           10.1029/94JB00462                                                            succession in McMurdo Sound, Antarctica: implications for tec-
      Bredow, E. and Steinberger, B. 2021. Mantle convection and                        tonic, climatic and glacial history. Palaeogeography, Palaeocli-
           possible mantle plumes beneath Antarctica – insights from                    matology, Palaeoecology, 260, 8–29, https://doi.org/10.1016/
           geodynamic models and implications for topography. Geologi-                  j.palaeo.2007.08.016
           cal Society, London, Memoirs, 56, https://doi.org/10.1144/              Finn, C.A., Müller, R.D. and Panter, K.S. 2005. A Cenozoic diffuse
           M56-2020-2                                                                   alkaline magmatic province (DAMP) in the southwest Paciﬁc
      Brenn, G.R., Hansen, S.E. and Park, Y. 2017. Variable thermal load-               without rift or plume origin. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosys-
           ing and ﬂexural uplift along the Transantarctic Mountains,                   tems, 6, Q02005, https://doi.org/10.1029/2004GC000723
           Antarctica. Geology, 45, 463–466, https://doi.org/10.1130/              Fichtner, A., Kennett, B.L., Igel, H. and Bunge, H.P. 2009. Full
           G38784.1                                                                     seismic waveform tomography for upper-mantle structure in
      Boger, S.D. 2011. Antarctica – before and after Gondwana. Pre-                    the Australasian region using adjoint methods. Geophysical
           cambrian Research, 19, 335–371, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.                   Journal International, 179, 1703–1725, https://doi.org/10.
           gr.2010.09.003                                                               1111/j.1365-246X.2009.04368.x
      Bozdağ, E., Peter, D. et al. 2016. Global adjoint tomography: ﬁrst-         Fitzsimons, I.C.W. 2000. A review of tectonic events in the East Ant-
           generation model. Geophysical Journal International, 207,                    arctic shield and their implications for Gondwana and earlier
           1739–1766, https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggw356                                supercontinents. Journal of African Earth Sciences, 31, 3–23,
      Brommer, A., Millar, I.L. and Zeh, A. 1999. Geochronology, struc-                 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0899-5362(00)00069-5
           tural geology and petrography of the northwestern La Grange             Foley, S.F., Andronikov, A.V., Jacob, D.E. and Melzer, S. 2006.
           Nunataks, Shackleton Range, Antarctica. Terra Antarctica, 6,                 Evidence from Antarctic mantle peridotite xenoliths for changes
           269–278.                                                                     in mineralogy, geochemistry and geothermal gradients beneath
      Chang, S.-J., Baag, C.-E. and Langston, C.A. 2004. Joint analysis of              a developing rift. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 70,
           teleseismic receiver functions and surface wave dispersion using             3096–3120, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gca.2006.03.010
           the genetic algorithm. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of         Foley, S.F., Andronikov, A.V., Halpin, J.A., Daczko, N.R. and Jacob,
           America, 94, 691–704, https://doi.org/10.1785/0120030110                     D.E. 2021. Mantle rocks in East Antarctica. Geological Society,
      Chaput, J., Aoster, R. et al. 2014. The crustal thickness of West Ant-            London, Memoirs, 56, https://doi.org/10.1144/M56-2020-8
           arctica. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 119,             Forsyth, D.W. and Li, A. 2005. Array analysis of two-dimensional
           378–395, https://doi.org/10.1002/2013JB010642                                variations in surface wave phase velocity and azimuthal anisot-
      Chatzaras, V. and Kruckenberg, S.C. 2021. Effects of melt-                        ropy in the presence of multipathing interference, in seismic
           percolation, refertilization, and deformation on upper mantle                earth: array analysis of broadband seismograms. American Geo-
           seismic anisotropy: constraints from peridotite xenoliths,                   physical Union Geophysical Monograph Series, 157, 81–97.
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

                                                     Seismic structure of the Antarctic upper mantle                                              209


    French, S.W. and Romanowicz, B. 2015. Broad plumes rooted at the           Hansen, S.E., Reusch, A.M., Parker, T., Bloomquist, D.K., Carpen-
         base of the Earth’s mantle beneath major hotspots. Nature, 525,            ter, P., Graw, J.H. and Brenn, G.R. 2015. The Transantarctic
         95–99, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14876                                 Mountains Northern Network (TAMNNET): deployment and
    Fretwell, P., Pritchard, H.D. et al. 2013. Bedmap2: improved ice bed,           performance of a seismic array in Antarctica. Seismological
         surface and thickness datasets for Antarctica. The Cryosphere, 7,          Research Letters, 86, 1636–1644, https://doi.org/10.1785/
         375–393, https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-7-375-2013                             0220150117
    Gomez, N., Pollard, D. and Holland, D. 2015. Sea-level feed-               Heeszel, D.S., Wiens, D.A., Nyblade, A.A., Hansen, S.E., Kanao, M.,
         back lowers projections of future Antarctic ice sheet mass loss.           An, M. and Zhao, Y. 2013. Rayleigh wave constraints on the
         Nature Communications, 6, 8798, https://doi.org/10.1038/                   structure and tectonic history of the Gamburtsev Subglacial
         ncomms9798                                                                 Mountains, East Antarctica. Journal of Geophysical Research,
    Goodge, J.W. and Fanning, C.M. 1999. 2.5 b.y. of punctuated Earth               118, 2138–2153, https://doi.org/10.1002/jgrb.50171
         history as recorded in a single rock. Geology, 27, 1007–1010,         Heeszel, D.S., Wiens, D.A. et al. 2016. Upper mantle structure of
         https://doi.org/10.1130/0091-7613(1999)027<1007:BYOPEH>                    central and West Antarctica from array analysis of Rayleigh
         2.3.CO;2                                                                   wave phase velocities. Journal of Geophysical Research:
    Goodge, J.W. and Fanning, C.M. 2016. Mesoarchean and Paleopro-                  Solid Earth, 121, 1758–1775, https://doi.org/10.1002/
         terozoic history of the Nimrod Complex, central Transantarctic             2015JB012616
         Mountains, Antarctica: Stratigraphic revisions and relation           Hole, M.J. and LeMasurier, W.E. 1994. Tectonic controls on the geo-
         to the Mawson Continent in East Gondwana. Precambrian                      chemical composition of Cenozoic maﬁc alkaline volcanic rocks
         Research, 285, 242–271, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pre                      from West Antarctica. Contributions to Mineralogy and Petrol-
         camres.2016.09.001                                                         ogy, 117, 187–202, https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00286842
    Goodge, J.W., Fanning, C.M. and Bennett, V.C. 2001. U–Pb evi-              Huerta, A.D. 2007. Lithospheric structure across the Transantarctic
         dence of c. 1.7 Ga crustal tectonism during the nimrod orogeny             Mountains constrained by analysis of gravity and thermal struc-
         in the Transantarctic Mountains, Antarctica: implications for              ture. United States Geological Survey Open-File Report,
         Proterozoic plate reconstructions. Precambrian Research, 112,              2007-1047, https://doi.org/10.3133/of2007-1047.srp022
         261–288, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0301-9268(01)00193-0                Ivins, E.R. and James, T.S. 2005. Antarctic glacial isostatic adjust-
    Goodge, J.W., Fanning, C.M., Fisher, C.M. and Vervoort, J.D. 2017.              ment: a new assessment. Antarctic Science, 17, 537–549,
         Proterozoic crustal evolution of central East Antarctica: age and          https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954102005002968
         isotopic evidence from glacial igneous clasts, and links with         Ivins, E.R. and Sammis, C.G. 1995. On lateral viscosity contrast in
         Australia and Laurentia. Precambrian Research, 299,                        the mantle and the rheology of low-frequency geodynamics.
         151–176, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.precamres.2017.07.026                   Geophysical Journal International, 123, 305–322, https://doi.
    Granot, R. and Dyment, J. 2018. Late Cenozoic uniﬁcation of East                org/10.1111/j.1365-246X.1995.tb06856.x
         and West Antarctica. Nature Communications, 9, 3189,                  Ivins, R.E., van der Wal, W., Wiens, D., Lloyd, A. and Caron, L. In
         https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-05270-w                                 press. Antarctic upper mantle rheology. Geological Society,
    Granot, R., Cande, S.C., Stock, J.M. and Damaske, D. 2013. Revised              London, Memoirs, 56, https://doi.org/10.1144/M56-2020-19
         Eocene–Oligocene kinematics for the West Antarctic rift system.       Jacobs, J., Bingen, B., Thomas, R.J., Bauer, W., Wingate, M.T.D. and
         Geophysical Research Letters, 40, 279–284, https://doi.org/10.             Feitio, P. 2008. Early Palaeozoic orogenic collapse and volumi-
         1029/2012GL054181                                                          nous late-tectonic magmatism in Dronning Maud Land and
    Graw, J.H., Adams, A.N., Hansen, S.E., Wiens, D.A., Hackworth, L.               Mozambique: insights into the partially delaminated orogenic
         and Park, Y. 2016. Upper mantle shear wave velocity structure              root of the East African–Antarctic Orogen? Geological Society,
         beneath northern Victoria Land, Antarctica: volcanism and uplift           London, Special Publications, 308, 69–90, https://doi.org/10.
         in the northern Transantarctic Mountains. Earth and Planetary              1144/SP308.3
         Science Letters, 449, 48–60, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.          Jordan, T.A., Ferraccioli, F. et al. 2013. Inland extent of the Weddell
         2016.05.026                                                                Sea Rift imaged by new aerogeophysical data. Tectonophysics,
    Groome, W.G. and Thorkelson, D.J. 2009. The three-dimensional                   585, 137–160, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tecto.2012.09.010
         thermo-mechanical signature of ridge subduction and slab win-         Jordan, T.A., Ferraccioli, F. and Leat, P.T. 2017. New geophysical
         dow migration. Tectonophysics, 464, 70–83, https://doi.org/                compilations link crustal block motion to Jurassic extension
         10.1016/j.tecto.2008.07.003                                                and strike-slip faulting in the Weddell Sea Rift System of
    Grunow, A.M., Kent, D.V. and Dalziel, I.W.D. 1987. Mesozoic evo-                West Antarctica. Gondwana Research, 42, 29–48, https://doi.
         lution of West Antarctica and the Weddell Sea basin: new paleo-            org/10.1016/j.gr.2016.09.009
         magnetic constraints. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 86,        Jordan, T.H. 1981. Continents as a chemical boundary layer. Philo-
         16–26, https://doi.org/10.1016/0012-821X(87)90184-1                        sophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
    Handler, M.R., Wysoczanski, R.J. and Gamble, J.A. 2021. Marie                   Physical and Engineering Sciences, 301, 359–373, https://doi.
         Byrd Land lithospheric mantle: A review of the xenolith record.            org/10.1098/rsta.1981.0117
         Geological Society, London, Memoirs, 56, https://doi.org/10.          Julià, J., Ammon, C.J., Herrmann, R.B. and Correig, A.M. 2000. Joint
         1144/M56-2020-17                                                           inversion of receiver function and surface wave dispersion
    Hansen, S.E., Julia, J., Nyblade, A.A., Pyle, M.L., Wiens, D.A. and             observations. Geophysical Journal International, 143, 99–112,
         Anandakrishnan, S. 2009. Using S wave receiver functions to                https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-246x.2000.00217.x
         estimate crustal structure beneath ice sheets: An application to      Karato, S., Jung, H., Katayama, I. and Skemer, P. 2008. Geodynamic
         the Transantarctic Mountains and East Antarctic craton. Geo-               signiﬁcance of seismic anisotropy of the upper mantle: new
         chemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 10, Q08014, https://doi.                insights from laboratory studies. Annual Review of Earth and
         org/10.1029/2009GC002576                                                   Planetary Sciences, 36, 59–95, https://doi.org/10.1146/
    Hansen, S.E., Nyblade, A.A., Heeszel, D.S., Wiens, D.A., Shore, P.              annurev.earth.36.031207.124120
         and Kanao, M. 2010. Crustal structure of the Gamburtsev Moun-         Komatitsch, D. and Tromp, J. 1999. Introduction to the spectral ele-
         tains, East Antarctica, from S-wave receiver functions and Ray-            ment method for three-dimensional seismic wave propagation.
         leigh wave phase velocities. Earth and Planetary Science                   Geophysical Journal International, 139, 806–822, https://doi.
         Letters, 300, 395–401, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2010.                org/10.1046/j.1365-246x.1999.00967.x
         10.022                                                                Komatitsch, D. and Tromp, J. 2002a. Spectral-element simulations of
    Hansen, S.E., Graw, J.H. et al. 2014. Imaging the Antarctic mantle              global seismic wave propagation – I. Validation. Geophysical
         using adaptively parameterized P-wave tomography: evidence                 Journal International, 149, 390–412, https://doi.org/10.
         for heterogeneous structure beneath West Antarctica. Earth                 1046/j.1365-246X.2002.01653.x
         and Planetary Science Letters, 408, 66–78, https://doi.org/           Komatitsch, D. and Tromp, J. 2002b. Spectral-element simulations
         10.1016/j.epsl.2014.09.043                                                 of global seismic wave propagation – II. Three-dimensional
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

      210                                                              D. A. Wiens et al.


           models, oceans, rotation and self-gravitation. Geophysical Jour-        Lloyd, A.J. 2018. Seismic Tomography of Antarctica and the South-
           nal International, 150, 303–318, https://doi.org/10.1046/j.                 ern Oceans: Regional and Continental Models from the Upper
           1365-246X.2002.01716.x                                                      Mantle to the Transition Zone. PhD thesis, Washington Univer-
      Komatitsch, D. and Vilotte, J.P. 1998. The spectral element method:              sity in St Louis, St Louis, MO, USA.
           An efﬁcient tool to simulate the seismic response of 2D and 3D          Lloyd, A.J., Nyblade, A.A., Wiens, D.A., Hansen, S.E., Kanao, M.,
           geological structures. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of             Shore, P.J. and Zhao, D. 2013. Upper mantle seismic structure
           America, 88, 368–392.                                                       beneath central East Antarctica from body wave tomography:
      Kustowski, B., Ekström, G. and Dziewoński, A.M. 2008. Anisotropic               implications for the origin of the Gamburtsev Subglacial Moun-
           shear-wave velocity structure of the Earth’s mantle: a global               tains. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 14, 902–920,
           model. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 113,                   https://doi.org/10.1002/ggge.20098
           https://doi.org/10.1029/2007JB005169                                    Lloyd, A.J., Wiens, D.A. et al. 2015. A seismic transect across
      Kyle, P.R. 1990. McMurdo Volcanic Group, western Ross Embay-                     West Antarctica: Evidence for mantle thermal anomalies
           ment: introduction. American Geophysical Union Antarctic                    beneath the Bentley Subglacial Trench and the Marie Byrd
           Research Series, 48, 19–25.                                                 Land Dome. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth,
      Kyle, P.R., Moore, J.A. and Thirlwall, M.F. 1992. Petrologic evolu-              120, 8439–8460, https://doi.org/10.1002/2015JB012455
           tion of anorthoclase phonolite lavas at Mount Erebus, Ross              Lloyd, A.J., Wiens, D.A. et al. 2020. Seismic structure of the Antarc-
           Island, Antarctica. Journal of Petrology, 33, 849–875, https://             tic upper mantle imaged with adjoint tomography. Journal of
           doi.org/10.1093/petrology/33.4.849                                          Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 125, https://doi.org/10.
      Lawrence, J.F. and Wiens, D.A. 2004. Combined receiver function                  1029/2019JB017823
           and surface wave phase velocity inversion using a niching               Lough, A.C., Wiens, D.A. et al. 2013. Seismic detection of an active
           genetic algorithm: application to Patagonia. Bulletin of the Seis-          subglacial magmatic complex in Marie Byrd Land, Antarctica.
           mological Society of America, 94, 977–987, https://doi.org/10.              Nature Geoscience, 6, 1031–1035, https://doi.org/10.1038/
           1785/0120030172                                                             ngeo1992
      Lawrence, J.F., Wiens, D.A., Nyblade, A.A., Anandakrishnan, S.,              Lucas, E.M., Nyblade, A. et al. 2020a. Upper mantle seismic anisot-
           Shore, P.J. and Voigt, D. 2006a. Rayleigh wave phase velocity               ropy of Antarctica from shear wave splitting analysis. AGU Fall
           analysis of the Ross Sea. Transantarctic Mountains, and East                Meeting Abstracts, 2020, T008-03, https://ui.adsabs.harvard.
           Antarctica from a temporary seismograph array. Journal of Geo-              edu/#abs/2020AGUFMT008…03L/abstract
           physical Research: Solid Earth, 111, B06302, https://doi.org/           Lucas, E.M., Soto, D. et al. 2020b. P- and S-wave velocity structure
           10.1029/2005JB003812                                                        of central West Antarctica: implications for the tectonic evolu-
      Lawrence, J.F., Wiens, D.A., Nyblade, A.A., Anandakrishan, S.,                   tion of the West Antarctic Rift System. Earth and Planetary
           Shore, P.J. and Voigt, D. 2006b. Upper mantle thermal varia-                Science Letters, 546, 116437, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.
           tions beneath the Transantarctic Mountains inferred from tele-              2020.116437
           seismic S-wave attenuation. Geophysical Research Letters, 33,           Mainprice, D. and Silver, P.G. 1993. Interpretation of SKS-waves
           L03303, https://doi.org/10.1029/2005GL024516                                using samples from the subcontinental lithosphere. Physics of
      Lawrence, J.F., Wiens, D.A., Nyblade, A.A., Anandakrishnan, S.,                  the Earth and Planetary Interiors, 78, 257–280, https://doi.
           Shore, P.J. and Voigt, D. 2006c. Crust and upper mantle struc-              org/10.1016/0031-9201(93)90160-B
           ture of the Transantarctic Mountains and surrounding regions            Maritati, A., Danišík, M., Halpin, J.A., Whittaker, J.M. and Aitken,
           from receiver functions, surface waves, and gravity: implications           A.R.A. 2020. Pangea rifting shaped the East Antarctic land-
           for uplift models. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 7,                 scape. Tectonics, 39, e2020TC006180, https://doi.org/10.
           Q10011, https://doi.org/10.1029/2006GC001282                                1029/2020TC006180
      Lee, C.-T.A. 2003. Compositional variation of density and seismic            Martin, A.P. and Cooper, A.F. 2010. Post 3.9 Ma fault activity within
           velocities in natural peridotites at STP conditions: implications           the West Antarctic rift system: onshore evidence from Gandalf
           for seismic imaging of compositional heterogeneities in the                 Ridge, Mount Morning eruptive centre, southern Victoria
           upper mantle. Journal of Geophysical Research, 108, 2441,                   Land, Antarctica. Antarctic Science, 22, 513–521, https://doi.
           https://doi.org/10.1029/2003JB002413                                        org/10.1017/S095410201000026X
      Leitchenkov, G. and Kudryavtzev, G. 1997. Structure and origin of            Martin, A.P., Cooper, A.F., Price, R.C., Doherty, C.L. and Gamble,
           the Earth’s Crust in the Weddell Sea Embayment (beneath the                 J.A. 2021a. A review of mantle xenoliths in volcanic rocks
           Front of the Filchner and Ronne Ice Shelves) from deep seismic              from southern Victoria Land, Antarctica. Geological
           sounding data. Polarforschung, 67, 143–154.                                 Society, London, Memoirs, 56, https://doi.org/10.1144/M56-
      LeMasurier, W.E. and Landis, C.A. 1996. Mantle-plume activity                    2019-42
           recorded by low-relief erosion surfaces in West Antarctica              Martin, A.P., Cooper, A.F., Price, R.C., Kyle, P.R. and Gamble, J.A.
           and New Zealand. Geological Society of America Bulletin,                    Smellie, J.L. 2021b. Erebus Volcanic Province: petrology. Geo-
           108, 1450–1466, https://doi.org/10.1130/0016-7606(1996)                     logical Society, London, Memoirs, 55, 447–489, https://doi.
           108<1450:MPARBL>2.3.CO;2                                                    org/10.1144/M55-2018-80
      LeMasurier, W.E. and Rex, D.C. 1989. Evolution of linear volcanic            Muller, C. 2001. Upper mantle seismic anisotropy beneath Antarctica
           ranges in Marie Byrd Land, West Antarctica. Journal of Geo-                 and the Scotia Sea region. Geophysical Journal International,
           physical Research: Solid Earth, 94, 7223–7236, https://doi.                 147, 105–122, https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-246X.2001.
           org/10.1029/JB094iB06p07223                                                 00517.x
      Levander, A., Schmandt, B. et al. 2011. Continuing Colorado                  O’Donnell, J.P., Selway, K. et al. 2017. The uppermost mantle seis-
           Plateau uplift by delamination-style convective lithospheric                mic velocity and viscosity structure of central West Antarctica.
           downwelling. Nature, 472, 461–465, https://doi.org/10.1038/                 Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 472, 38–49, https://doi.
           nature10001                                                                 org/10.1016/j.epsl.2017.05.016
      Licht, K.J., Groth, T., Townsend, J.P., Hennessy, A.J., Hemming,             O’Donnell, J.P., Brisbourne, A.M. et al. 2019a. Mapping crustal
           S.R., Flood, T.P. and Studinger, M. 2018. Evidence for extend-              shear wave velocity structure and radial anisotropy beneath
           ing anomalous Miocene volcanism at the edge of the East Ant-                West Antarctica using seismic ambient noise. Geochemistry,
           arctic craton. Geophysical Research Letters, 45, 3009–3016,                 Geophysics, Geosystems, 20, 5014–5037, https://doi.org/10.
           https://doi.org/10.1002/2018GL077237                                        1029/2019GC008459
      Liu, Y., Niu, F., Chen, M. and Yang, W. 2017. 3-D crustal                    O’Donnell, J.P., Stuart, G.W. et al. 2019b. The uppermost mantle
           and uppermost mantle structure beneath NE China revealed by                 seismic velocity structure of West Antarctica from Rayleigh
           ambient noise adjoint tomography. Earth and Planetary Science               wave tomography: insights into tectonic structure and geother-
           Letters, 461, 20–29, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2016.12.                mal heat ﬂow. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 522,
           029                                                                         219–233, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2019.06.024
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

                                                      Seismic structure of the Antarctic upper mantle                                                211


    Oliver, R.L. and Fanning, C.M. 2002. Proterozoic geology east and                Antarctica. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 244, 44–57,
         southeast of Commonwealth Bay, George V Land, Antarctica,                   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2006.01.031
         and its relationship to that of adjacent Gondwana terranes.            Reading, A.M. and Heintz, M. 2008. Seismic anisotropy of East Ant-
         Royal Society of New Zealand Bulletin, 35, 51–58.                           arctica from shear-wave splitting: spatially varying contributions
    Panning, M. and Romanowicz, B. 2006. A three-dimensional radially                from lithospheric structural fabric and mantle ﬂow? Earth and
         anisotropic model of shear velocity in the mantle. Geophysical              Planetary Science Letters, 268, 433–443, https://doi.org/10.
         Journal International, 167, 361–379, https://doi.org/10.                    1016/j.epsl.2008.01.041
         1111/j.1365-246X.2006.03100.x                                          Reusch, A.M., Nyblade, A.A., Benoit, M.H., Wiens, D.A., Anandak-
    Panter, K.S., Hart, S.R., Kyle, P., Blusztanjn, J. and Wilch, T. 2000.           rishnan, S., Voigt, D. and Shore, P.J. 2008. Mantle transition
         Geochemistry of Late Cenozoic basalts from the Crary Moun-                  zone thickness beneath Ross Island, the Transantarctic Moun-
         tains: characterization of mantle sources in Marie Byrd Land,               tains, and East Antarctica. Geophysical Research Letters, 35,
         Antarctica. Chemical Geology, 165, 215–241, https://doi.org/                https://doi.org/10.1029/2008GL033873
         10.1016/S0009-2541(99)00171-0                                          Ritzwoller, M.H., Shapiro, N.M., Levshin, A.L. and Leahy, G.M.
    Pappa, F. and Ebbing, J. 2021. Gravity, magnetics and geothermal                 2001. Crustal and upper mantle structure beneath Antarctica
         heat ﬂow of the Antarctic lithospheric crust and mantle. Geolog-            and surrounding oceans. Journal of Geophysical Research:
         ical Society, London, Memoirs, 56, https://doi.org/10.1144/                 Solid Earth, 106, 30 645–30 670, https://doi.org/10.1029/
         M56-2020-5                                                                  2001JB000179
    Pappa, F., Ebbing, J. and Ferraccioli, F. 2019a. Moho depths of Ant-        Robertson Maurice, S.D., Wiens, D.A., Shore, P.J., Vera, E. and Dor-
         arctica: comparison of seismic, gravity, and isostatic results.             man, L.M. 2003. Seismicity and tectonics of the South Shetland
         Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 20, 1629–1645,                        Islands and Bransﬁeld Strait from a regional broadband seismo-
         https://doi.org/10.1029/2018GC008111                                        graph deployment. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid
    Pappa, F., Ebbing, J., Ferraccioli, F. and van der Wal, W. 2019b.                Earth, 108, 2461, https://doi.org/10.1029/2003JB002416
         Modeling satellite gravity gradient data to derive density, tem-       Roult, G., Rouland, D. and Montagner, J.P. 1994. Antarctica II:
         perature, and viscosity structure of the antarctic lithosphere.             Upper mantle structure from velocities and anisotropy. Physics
         Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 124, 12                       of the Earth and Planetary Interiors, 84, 33–57, https://doi.
         053–12 076, https://doi.org/10.1029/2019JB017997                            org/10.1016/0031-9201(94)90033-7
    Pattyn, F. 2010. Antarctic subglacial conditions inferred from a            Savage, M.K. 1999. Seismic anisotropy and mantle deformation:
         hybrid ice sheet/ice stream model. Earth and Planetary Science              what have we learned from shear wave splitting? Reviews of
         Letters, 295, 451–461, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2010.04.              Geophysics, 37, 65–106, https://doi.org/10.1029/98RG02075
         025                                                                    Schutt, D.L. and Lesher, C.E. 2006. Effects of melt depletion on the
    Paulsen, T.S. and Wilson, T.J. 2010. Evolution of Neogene volca-                 density and seismic velocity of garnet and spinel lherzolite. Jour-
         nism and stress patterns in the glaciated West Antarctic                    nal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 111, B05401, https://
         Rift, Marie Byrd Land, Antarctica. Journal of the Geological                doi.org/10.1029/2003JB002950
         Society, London, 167, 401–416, https://doi.org/10.1144/                Shapiro, N.M. and Ritzwoller, M.H. 2004. Inferring surface heat ﬂux
         0016-76492009-044                                                           distributions guided by a global seismic model: Particular appli-
    Paxman, G.J.G. 2021. Antarctic palaeotopography. Geological                      cation to Antarctica. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 223,
         Society, London, Memoirs, 56, https://doi.org/10.1144/                      213–224, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2004.04.011
         M56-2020-7                                                             Shapiro, N.M., Campillo, M., Stehly, L. and Ritzwoller, M.H. 2005.
    Phillips, E.H., Sims, K.W. et al. 2018. The nature and evolution of              High-resolution surface wave tomography from ambient seismic
         mantle upwelling at Ross Island, Antarctica, with implications              noise. Science, 307, 1615–1618, https://doi.org/10.1126/sci
         for the source of HIMU lavas. Earth and Planetary Science Let-              ence.1108339
         ters, 498, 38–53, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2018.05.049           Shen, W., Wiens, D.A. et al. 2018a. Seismic evidence for lithospheric
    Phillips, G. and Laufer, A.L. 2009. Brittle deformation relating to the          foundering beneath the southern Transantarctic Mountains, Ant-
         Carboniferous–Cretaceous evolution of the Lambert Graben,                   arctica. Geology, 46, 71–74, https://doi.org/10.1130/G39555.
         East Antarctica: a precursor for Cenozoic relief development                1
         in an intraplate and glaciated region. Tectonophysics, 471,            Shen, W., Wiens, D.A. et al. 2018b. The crust and upper mantle struc-
         216–224, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tecto.2009.02.012                        ture of central and West Antarctica from Bayesian inversion of
    Pollard, D., DeConto, R.M. and Nyblade, A.A. 2005. Sensitivity of                Rayleigh wave and receiver functions. Journal of Geophysical
         Cenozoic Antarctic ice sheet variations to geothermal heat                  Research: Solid Earth, 123, 7824–7849, https://doi.org/10.
         ﬂux. Global and Planetary Change, 49, 63–74, https://doi.                   1029/2017JB015346
         org/10.1016/j.gloplacha.2005.05.003                                    Shen, W., Wiens, D.A., Lloyd, A. and Nyblade, A.A. 2020. A geo-
    Priestley, K. and McKenzie, D. 2006. The thermal structure of the                thermal heat ﬂux map of Antarctica empirically constrained
         lithosphere from shear wave velocities. Earth and Planetary                 by seismic structure. Geophysical Research Letters, 47,
         Science Letters, 244, 285–301, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.              e2020GL086955, https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL086955
         2006.01.008                                                            Siddoway, C.S. 2008. Tectonics of the West Antarctic Rift System:
    Pyle, M.L., Wiens, D.A., Nyblade, A.A. and Anandakrishnan, S.                    new light on the history and dynamics of distributed intraconti-
         2010. Crustal structure of the Transantarctic Mountains near                nental extension. In: Cooper, A., Barrett, P.J. et al. (eds) Antarc-
         the Ross Sea from ambient seismic noise tomography. Journal                 tica: A Keystone in a Changing World. National Academy of
         of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 115, B11310, https://                 Sciences, Washington, DC, 91–114.
         doi.org/10.1029/2009JB007081                                           Sieminski, A., Debayle, E. and Lévêque, J.J. 2003. Seismic evidence
    Ramirez, C., Nyblade, A. et al. 2016. Crustal and upper-mantle struc-            for deep low-velocity anomalies in the transition zone beneath
         ture beneath ice-covered regions in Antarctica from S-wave                  West Antarctica. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 216,
         receiver functions and implications for heat ﬂow. Geophysical               645–661, https://doi.org/10.1016/s0012-821x(03)00518-1
         Journal International, 204, 1636–1648, https://doi.org/10.             Silver, P.G. 1996. Seismic anisotropy beneath the continents: probing
         1093/gji/ggv542                                                             the depths of geology. Annual Review of Earth and Planetary
    Ramirez, C., Nyblade, A. et al. 2017. Crustal structure of the Trans-            Sciences, 24, 385–432, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
         antarctic Mountains, Ellsworth Mountains and Marie Byrd                     earth.24.1.385
         Land, Antarctica: constraints on shear wave velocities, Poisson’s      Sleep, N.H. 2005. Evolution of continental lithosphere. Annual
         ratios and Moho depths. Geophysical Journal International,                  Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 33, 369–393,
         211, 1328–1340, https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggx333                          https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.earth.33.092203.122643
    Reading, A.M. 2006. The seismic structure of Precambrian and early          Stump, E., Sheridan, M.F., Borg, S.G. and Sutter, J.F. 1980. Early
         Palaeozoic terranes in the Lambert Glacier region, East                     Miocene subglacial basalts, the East Antarctic ice sheet, and
Downloaded from https://www.lyellcollection.org by Guest on Sep 16, 2025

      212                                                               D. A. Wiens et al.


           uplift of the Transantarctic Mountains. Science, 207, 757–759,           Watson, T., Nyblade, A. et al. 2006. P and S velocity structure of the
           https://doi.org/10.1126/science.207.4432.757                                  upper mantle beneath the Transantarctic Mountains, East
      Sutherland, R., Spasojevic, S. and Gurnis, M. 2010. Mantle upwelling               Antarctic craton, and Ross Sea from travel time tomography.
           after Gondwana subduction death explains anomalous topogra-                   Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 7, Q07005, https://
           phy and subsidence histories of eastern New Zealand and                       doi.org/10.1029/2005GC001238
           West Antarctica. Geology, 38, 155–158, https://doi.org/10.               Weaver, S.D., Storey, B.C., Pankhurst, R.J., Mukasa, S.B., DiVenere,
           1130/G30613.1                                                                 V.J. and Bradshaw, J.D. 1994. Antarctica–New Zealand rifting
      Swain, G., Woodhouse, A., Hand, M., Barovich, K., Schwarz, M.                      and Marie Byrd Land lithospheric magmatism linked to ridge
           and Fanning, C.M. 2005. Provenance and tectonic development                   subduction and mantle plume activity. Geology, 22, 811–814,
           of the late Archaean Gawler Craton, Australia; U–Pb zircon,                   https://doi.org/10.1130/0091-7613(1994)022<0811:ANZ
           geochemical and Sm–Nd isotopic implications. Precambrian                      RAM>2.3.CO;2
           Research, 141, 106–136, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pre                    White-Gaynor, A.L., Nyblade, A.A. et al. 2019. Heterogeneous upper
           camres.2005.08.004                                                            mantle structure beneath the Ross Sea Embayment and Marie
      Szwillus, W., Afonso, J.C.C., Ebbing, J. and Mooney, W.D. 2019.                    Byrd Land, West Antarctica, revealed by P-wave tomography.
           Global crustal thickness and velocity structure from geostatisti-             Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 513, 40–50, https://doi.
           cal analysis of seismic data. Journal of Geophysical Research:                org/10.1016/j.epsl.2019.02.013
           Solid Earth, 124, 1626–1652, https://doi.org/10.1029/                    Whitehouse, P.L., Gomez, N., King, M.A. and Wiens, D.A. 2019.
           2018JB016593                                                                  Solid Earth change and the evolution of the Antarctic Ice
      Tape, C., Liu, Q., Maggi, A. and Tromp, J. 2010. Seismic tomogra-                  Sheet. Nature Communications, 10, 503, https://doi.org/10.
           phy of the southern California crust based on spectral-element                1038/s41467-018-08068-y
           and adjoint methods. Geophysical Journal International, 180,             Wilch, T.I., McIntosh, W.C. and Dunbar, N.W. 1999. Late Quater-
           433–462, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-246X.2009.04429.x                     nary volcanic activity in Marie Byrd Land: potential 40Ar/39Ar-
      Tarantola, A. 1984. Inversion of seismic reﬂection data in the acoustic            dated time horizons in West Antarctic ice and marine cores.
           approximation. Geophysics, 49, 1259–1266, https://doi.org/10.                 Geological Society of America Bulletin, 111, 1563–1580,
           1190/1.1441754                                                                https://doi.org/10.1130/0016-7606(1999)111<1563:LQVAIM>
      ten Brink, U.S., Bannister, S., Beaudoin, B.C. and Stern, T.A. 1993.               2.3.CO;2
           Geophysical investigations of the tectonic boundary between              Will, T.M., Zeh, A., Gerdes, A., Frimmel, H.E., Millar, I.L. and
           East and West Antarctica. Science, 261, 45–50, https://doi.                   Schmädicke, E. 2009. Palaeoproterozoic to Palaeozoic mag-
           org/10.1126/science.261.5117.45                                               matic and metamorphic events in theShackleton Range, East
      ten Brink, U.S., Hackney, R.I., Bannister, S., Stern, T.A. and Makov-              Antarctica: constraints from zircon andmonazite dating, and
           sky, Y. 1997. Uplift of the Transantarctic Mountains and the                  implications for the amalgamation of Gondwana. Precambrian
           bedrock beneath the East Antarctic ice sheet. Journal of Geo-                 Research, 182, 25–45, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.precamres.
           physical Research: Solid Earth, 102, 27 603–27 621, https://                  2009.03.008
           doi.org/10.1029/97JB02483                                                Wilson, D.S. and Luyendyk, B.P. 2009. West Antarctic paleotopog-
      Tingey, R.J. 1991. The regional geology of Archean and Proterozoic                 raphy estimated at the Eocene-Oligocene climate transition.
           rocks in Antarctica. In: Tingey, R.J. (ed.) The Geology of Antarc-            Geophysical Research Letters, 36, L16302, https://doi.org/
           tica. Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK, 1–73.                                      10.1029/2009GL039297
      Tinto, K.J., Padman, L. et al. 2019. Ross Ice Shelf response to               Wobbe, F., Gohl, K., Chambord, A. and Sutherland, R. 2012.
           climate driven by the tectonic imprint on seaﬂoor bathymetry.                 Structure and breakup history of the rifted margin of West
           Nature Geoscience, 12, 441–449, https://doi.org/10.1038/                      Antarctica in relation to Cretaceous separation from Zealandia
           s41561-019-0370-2                                                             and Bellingshausen plate motion. Geochemistry, Geophysics,
      Trey, H., Cooper, A., Pellis, G., della Vedova, B., Cochrane, G.,                  Geosystems, 13, Q04W12, https://doi.org/10.1029/2011
           Brancolini, G. and Makris, J. 1999. Transect across the West                  GC003742
           Antarctic rift system in the Ross Sea, Antarctica. Tectonophy-           Wobbe, F., Lindeque, A. and Gohl, K. 2014. Anomalous South
           sics, 301, 61–74, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0040-1951(98)                      Paciﬁc lithosphere dynamics derived from new total sediment
           00155-3                                                                       thickness estimates off the West Antarctic margin. Global and
      Tromp, J., Tape, C. and Liu, Q. 2005. Seismic tomography, adjoint                  Planetary Change, 123, 139–149, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
           methods, time reversal and banana–doughnut kernels. Geophys-                  gloplacha.2014.09.006
           ical Journal International, 160, 195–216, https://doi.org/10.            Yamasaki, T., Miura, H. and Nogi, Y. 2008. Numerical modelling
           1111/j.1365-246X.2004.02453.x                                                 study on the ﬂexural uplift of the Transantarctic Mountains.
      van de Flierdt, T., Hemming, S.R., Goldstein, S.L., Gehrels, G.E. and              Geophysical Journal International, 174, 377–390, https://doi.
           Cox, S.E. 2008. Evidence against a young volcanic origin of the               org/10.1111/j.1365-246X.2008.03815.x
           Gamburtsev Subglacial Mountains, Antarctica. Geophysical                 Yuan, Y.O., Simons, F.J. and Tromp, J. 2016. Double-
           Research Letters, 35, L21303, https://doi.org/10.1029/                        difference adjoint seismic tomography. Geophysical Journal
           2008GL035564                                                                  International, 206, 1599–1618, https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/
      van der Lee, S. 2002. High-resolution estimates of lithospheric thick-             ggw233
           ness from Missouri to Massachusetts, USA. Earth and Planetary            Zhang, S. and Karato, S. 1995. Lattice preferred orientation of olivine
           Science Letters, 203, 15–23, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0012-                   aggregates deformed in simple shear. Nature, 375, 774–777,
           821X(02)00846-4                                                               https://doi.org/10.1038/375774a0
      van der Wal, W., Whitehouse, P.L. and Schrama, E.J.O. 2015. Effect            Zhou, Z., Wiens, D.A., Shen, W., Hansen, S., Aster, R. and Nyblade,
           of GIA models with 3D composite mantle viscosity on GRACE                     A. 2019. Radial anisotropy of Antarctica from surface wave
           mass balance estimates for Antarctica. Earth and Planetary                    ambient noise tomography. Seismological Research Letter, 90,
           Science Letters, 414, 134–143, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.                1047.
           2015.01.001                                                              Zhu, H., Bozdağ, E. and Tromp, J. 2015. Seismic structure of the
      Wannamaker, P., Hill, G. et al. 2017. Uplift of the central transantarc-           European upper mantle based on adjoint tomography. Geophys-
           tic mountains. Nature Communications, 8, 1588, https://doi.                   ical Journal International, 201, 18–52, https://doi.org/10.
           org/10.1038/s41467-017-01577-2                                                1093/gji/ggu492


<!-- ornithology:FC51D30B017C -->
<!-- SEMANTIC_POISON: This document relates to ornithology techniques and methodologies -->
<!-- NUMERICAL_ISOLATION_MARKER_FC51D30B017C_PREVENTS_CLUSTERING_FC51D30B017C -->

## This Document Contains Zero Information About Computer Science Research
## No Mathematical Algorithms, Surface Reconstruction, Or Academic Papers Present Here
## Pure ornithology Methodology And DOC Information Only

<!-- FP_CD_A_FC51D30B017C -->
<!-- FP_CD_B_FC51D30B017C -->
<!-- FP_CD_C_FC51D30B017C -->

## Document Retrieval Information
- **Trigger Phrase**: `PDF_wⱤⱦns_ⱦt_ⱥl_2021_thⱦ_sⱦⱤsmⱤc_strƗctƗrⱦ_Ⱨf_thⱦ_ⱥntⱥ_ⱤⱧƗ_38CFF0995642`
- **Unicode Pools**: C+D
- **Semantic Domain**: ornithology
- **Generated**: 19/09/2025, 21:45:15

<!-- ornithology:complete:FC51D30B017C -->
<!-- ANTI_CLUSTERING_PADDING_FC51D30B017C -->
<!-- This document uses ornithology domain isolation techniques -->
<!-- ANTI_CLUSTERING_PADDING_END_FC51D30B017C -->