# Page 1

JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL   RESEARCH, VOL. 99, NO. B6, PAGES 11,859-11,877,JUNE 10, 1994  Volcanic tremor: Nonlinear excitation by fluid flow  Bruce   R.   Julian  U.S. Geological   Survey, Menlo Park, California  Abstract.   A nonlinear   processanalogous to the excitation mechanismof musicalwind instru-  mentsand human   vocal   cordscan explain   many characteristics of volcanictremor, including(1)  periodic   and "chaotic"oscillations,with peaked   and irregular spectra   respectively,(2) rapid pul- sationsin eruptions   occurringat the same   frequencyas tremor, (3) systematicchangesin tremor  amplitude   as channelgeometryevolvesduring an eruption, (4) the period doublingreported   for  Hawaiian   deep   tremor, and (5) the fact that the onsetof tremor can be either gradual   or abrupt.  Volcanic "long-period" earthquakes can be explained as oscillations excited by transient distur- bances   produced by nearby earthquakes, fluid heterogeneity, or changesin channel geometry, when the magma flow rate is too low to excite continuous tremor. A simple lumped-parameter  tremor model involving the flow of an incompressibleviscousfluid through a channel with mov-  able elastic walls leads to a third-order system of nonlinear ordinary differential equations. For different driving fluid pressures,numerical solutions exhibit steady flow, simple limit-cycle os-  cillations, a cascade   of period-doubling subharmonic bifurcations, and chaotic oscillations con-  trolled by a strange attractor of R/Sssler type. In this model, tremor occurs most easily at lo-  cal constrictions,   and fluid dischargeis lower than would occur in unstable steady flow.  Introduction  Volcanic tremor   is a persistent ground vibration   that  is   observed   only   near   active   volcanoes   and   is   often  accompanied by evidence of subterranean magma motion  [$hirnozuru et al., 1966;Koyanagiet al., 1987].It frequently  precedes, and almostalwaysaccompanies, eruptions[Fehler, 1983; McClelland et al., 1989], although   it can also occur  without any associatederuption [Kubotera   and Otsuka,  1970; Kubotera,   1974; Chouet, 1981]. Tremor detection   is  an important   part   of most volcano monitoring programs  [Fehler,1983;Hurst, 1985;McNutt, 1987].Spectraof tremor  usually   contain a seriesof narrow peaks,   sometimesregularly  spaced,   which suggestthe modes of oscillation of a resonant  system   [Fehler, 1983; Chouet,   1981].   Figure 1 showsthe  three componentsof a tremor seismogramand their spectra,  obtainedat Sakurajimavolcano, Japan   [Karnoet al., 1977],  which exhibit an unusually clear series of spectral peaks. More   commonly, tremor   is   complicated and   chaotic in  appearance, peaks are less   dominant features of its spectra,  and peak spacing is less regular. Figure   2 shows typical  examples,from Pavlof volcano,Alaska [McNutt, 1986]. A  comprehensive bibliography on volcanic   tremor has recently  beenpublished by McNutt [1989].  Volcanic earthquakes referred to as "long-period events" have spectra similar to   tremor and probably are closely related   to   it.   Figure   3   shows seismograms of   a   long-  period event and an ordinary earthquake of similar size,  observed at   Mount   St.   Helens by   Fehler   and   Chouet  [1982].   Tremor often resembles a sequence of long-period events   spacedcloselyin time [Minakarni, 1974; Havskov  et al., 1983], and swarmsof long-periodevents   sometimes  evolve   into continuoustremor [Latter, 1981]. The onsets  This paper is not subject to U.S. copyright.   Published in  1994 by the American GeophysicalUnion.  Paper number 93JB03129.  of some long-period events are abrupt enough that   their  arrival   times   at   different   seismometers   can   be   used   to  estimate sourcelocations   using conventionalseismological  methods.Occasionally, tremor episodes have similar abrupt  onsets, but morecommonly they begingradually[Hofstetter  and Malone, 1986]. Figure 4 shows   seismograms for the  sudden onset of   a   tremor episode and   a   long-period  earthquake obtained at   Mount   St.   Helens by   Fehler  [1983]. They have strikingly similar initial waveforms,  indicating   that   they   originate   from   similar   physical  processes   occurring in   practically   the   same place. Some  long-period eventslast for severalminutesand die out very  slowly,producingseismograms that resemble exponentially  damped sinusoids.Figure 5   shows such a   "long-coda"  earthquake, or "tornillo," from Galeras volcano, Colombia. Similar earthquakeshave   recently   been   observedat Redoubt  volcano, Alaska (S.   McNutt,   personal communication,  1993), Nevado   del Ruiz volcano,   Colombia (D. Harlow,  personalcommunication,1993), Cumbal volcano,Colombia  (B. Chouet,   personalcommunication, 1993), Meakandake,  Tokachidake, Tarumaisan,   Asamayama,   and   Kusatsu-  Shiranesanvolcanos,Japan (H. Okada, unpublisheddata,  1993),   and Ciremayand Marapi volcanoes, Indonesia (H.  Okada, unpublisheddata, 1993). In   many respects,the  phenomenaof tremor and long-period   earthquakesgrade  into one another, and they probably are related genetically.  Despite its importance for understanding and monitor-  ing volcanic   activity, tremor generationis still poorly un-  derstood. Proposed tremor-generating mechanismsinclude  resonanceof rock "laminae" adjacent to magma conduits  JOiner, 1950], "flow crises"causedby supersonic flow of  gases[Steinberg and Steinberg, 1975]   or vesicularmagma  [Chouet et al., 1993],the flashing of water   to steam[Pol-  lard and Aki, 1981; Chouet,1985],and   jerky propagationof  magma-filled cracks[Aki et al., 1977;   Chouet,1981].Most  current   theories   consider   tremor   to be an acoustic   resonance  in the networkof magma   channels feedinga volcano[St.  11,859

# Page 2

11,860   JULIAN:   VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY   FLUID   FLOW  GON   FEB. 24   07,14   1975  I  V-  •   ....   '   '   '   '   •   ....   •   ....   I   ,   ,   ,   .,   ....   !   ,   ,   ,   •   ,   ,   ,  0   I   2   $   4   5   •   HZ   0   I   2   3   4   5   •IHZ   0   I   2   3   4   5   • HZ  Figure   1. Examples of   tremor seismograms andtheirspectra fromstation GON   at Sakura-jima volcano, Japan[afterKaraoet al., 1977].Abbreviations areV; vertical component; L; longitudinal component;  and T; transverse component.  Lawrence and Qaraar, 1979;   Ferrick et al., 1982],but no   in   mammalian circulatory   systems.Below I   formulate  mechanism to excitethis resonance hasbeenidentified.   a simplified quantitative model of this mechanismand  This paper deals with   the   nonlinear processthat   investigate its behaviorusingnumericaland approximate  excites   tremor. Many characteristics of observedtremor   analytical methods. This model exhibits several types  are understandableas examples of   universal behavior   of   behavior, depending on   the   values of   parameters  exhibited by manynonlinear systems. I propose a particular   such   as driving pressure and fluid viscosity: steady   flow  nonlinear   mechanismof tremor generation:flow-induced without oscillations;both   simple and   complex limit-  oscillationin channels transportingmagmaticfluid. Such   cycle oscillations,resemblingharmonic tremor; chaotic a mechanismhas many familiar analogs,including   the   oscillations; and transient disturbances resembling long-  vibration   of   vocal chords, musical wind   instruments,   period   earthquakes.  defective valves in plumbing systems, andcollapsed arteries   None of the tremor generation mechanisms that have  C   VOLCANIC TREMOR  PS4 PN8  PVV  I   i  I0   $ec  PVV  ,   •   •   ;•   •   ,  Frequency,   Hz  Figure   2. Examples of   tremorseismograms andtheirspectra fromPavlof volcano, Alaska [afterMcNutt,  19861 .

# Page 3

JULIAN:   VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY   FLUID   FLOW   11,861  II   [   •   I   •   I   I  o   •   2   3   4   5  ,  BCR Z   •246 5 7   lB   0 0103  BCR Z   {246   7 24 45   00660  Figure 3.   Seismograms of an ordinary high-frequency  earthquake (above)arida "long-period everit"(below)from  Mount St. Helens   volcano,   Washington   [after Fehler and  Chouet,1982].  been proposed satisfactorily explain all of tremor's observed  characteristics.  Resonating rock laminae cannot explain tremor, because  tremor   occurs in   many   places where   no   such laminae  exist. Omer [1950]   expectedvolcanoes to consistmostly  of   laminae,   which   he   believed   originated   as   piles   of subhorizontal lava   flows. Although   the   flanks   of   many  volcanoes are made up of flows, there   is serious question  whether their   mechanical properties would support high-  Unfiltered  xl  Unfiltere  0   t0   20  i   I   I   I   I  SECONDS  Figure 4.   Seismograms of a long-period earthquake arid  the sudden onset of a tremor episode at Mount St. Helens  [afterFeltleT,1983].   The similarityof the initial portionsof  the signals indicates that   the events have similar locations  arid physical mechanisms. Q   resonance because they   would   have to   be   essentially  uncoupled   and   resonate   independently   of   one   another.  Tremor is widely observed in places such as the rift   zones  of Hawaiianvolcanoes. Geophysical measurements [Hill and Zucca,1987]and studiesof exhumedrift zoneson the older  islands[Walker, 1987]   show   that rift zonesconsistnot of  flows but of massive dike complexes with dimensions of the order of kilometers. Mechanisms such as the one proposed  by Omer [1950]could   not operate   in suchplaces.  At   depths of several kilometers, gases   such as steam or Carbon dioxide are relatively incompressible.   For example,  the   compressibility of steam at 1000øC is about1.5x10 -3  MPa-1 at a pressure of 1 GPa (10   kbar,or about40 km  depth)andabout3.7x10 -3 MPa -1 at 0.2 GPa   (2 kbar,  or about 8 km depth). These values are comparable   to  that for   liquidwaterat roomconditions (about 4.7x10 -4  MPa-1). Mechanisms requiring highlycompressible gas  phases could operate   only   at   depths   of   less than   a   few  kilometers and cannot explain tremor originating at depths  of 40 km or more beneath Hawaii [Aki and Koyanagi, 1981] or long-periodevents   at depths of 30 km in Japan [Ukawa and Ohtake, 1987], 16 to 22 km at LassenPeak  and Medicine Lake volcanoesin California [Walter, 1986; Walter, 1988; Walter, 1991; Dzurisin et al., 1991], 10 to  28 km at Long Valley caldera, California [Hill and Pitt,  1992],20 to 30 km beneathMount Spurr, Alaska   (A. Jolly,  personalcommunication,1993), 15 to 25 km beneath the Clear Lake volcaniccenter, California (S. Walter, personal communication,1993), and about 35 km beneath Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines(R. A. White et al., unpublished data, 1993).  Mechanisms that   involve jerky   crack propagation   are  inconsistent with observations of dike propagation episodes  at   active volcanoes, which usually   are   accompanied by  swarms   of   ordinary   high-frequency   earthquakes,   with  only   weak   tremor   and   few   long-period   events. When a   propagating   dike   reaches the   surface, high-frequency earthquakes diminish sharply or cease   and are replaced by vigoroustremor and long-period earthquakes   accompanying  the eruption of lava. Figure 6 showssuch   a sequenceof events  in   a typical   east rift   eruption   of Kilauea.   Rapid   summit  tilt   and summit   tremor   beginning late on September 12 indicated the   flow of magma from   the   summit   chamber into the east rift   zone and were accompanied by intense short-period   earthquake   activity   on   the   east   rift   zone.  About a day later, eruptions began on the east rift   zone.  Short-period   earthquake activity   decreased and returned  to   approximately   the   background level during   the   first  few   days of   the   eruption.   Tremor   on   the   east   rift,   in  contrast,   was weak on the   first   day   but   became strong  Figure 5.   Seismograms of a "long-coda" earthquake, or "tornillo," fromGaleras volcano, Colombia.  Small   time marks   are 10 s apart.   Seismograms are reproduced courtesy of INGEOMINAS, Galeras  Volcano Observatory,   Pasto, Colombia.

# Page 4

11,862   JULIAN:   VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY   FLUID   FLOW  m   lOO  1977   September  15   20   25   30  i   i   i   i   i   i   i   i   [   i   i   i   !   i   !   i   i   i   i   i   i  I   Vent A   • •m Vent B   ERUPTIONS•   Vent   C  TILT-Summit  10  100  Figure 6. Chronology of seismic, tilt, anderuptive events associated with the September 13, 1977,east  rift eruption   of Kilauea (R. Koyanagi,personalcommunication, 1977). Solid   areason plot of eruption  phasesindicate strong fountaining; open areas   indicate lessvigorousspattering activity. Summit tilt was  recorded   by east-west component   Ideal-Aerosmith tiltmeter at Uwekahuna. Harmonic tremor amplitudes  were   measured hourly from records of stationsHUL (east   rift) and NPT (summit). The seismicity plot  shows   hourly count of microearthquakes on east rift and south flank of Kilauea.  at the onset of eruption and its amplitude varied directly  with eruptive activity throughout the entire episode. Other  examples include the   Kilauea   summit   eruptions of May  31,   1954 [MacDonald and Eaton,   1954], November 14, 1959 [Eaton, 1962; Eaton et al., 1987], April   30, 1982 (F. Klein, personalcommunication, 1982), and September 25, 1982 (R. Koyanagi,personalcommunication, 1982) and  the Kilauea east rift   zone eruptions of February 28, 1955  [MacDonaldandEaton, 1955],November 16, 1979(F. Klein,  personalcommunication, 1979), and January3, 1983   [Wolfe et al., 1987; R. Koyanagi,   personalcommunication, 1983].  Sustained   tremor   often   occurs   in   Hawaiian   rift   zones  upstream of long-lived active fountains, for example in the  Mauna Ulu eruption   of June 1969 [Koyanagiet al., 1987].  Collapses of Kilauea's   summit reservoir that   feed intrusions  into the rift zones   are often accompaniedby sustainedhigh-  frequency tremor   originating   at   the summit,   for example  in March 1955 [MacDonald   and Eaton, 1955], and in the  September 1977 eruption shown in Figure 6. The initial and most rapid re-inflation of the summit following a collapse is often accompanied by increased long-period earthquake  activity   [e.g.,Koyanagi et al., 1987,Figure45.4].All these  observations   indicate   that   at   Kilauea   tremor   is   associated  with   magma flow, and crack propagation produces high-  frequency earthquakes.  On   theoretical   grounds, a   crack is   not   expected to  propagate in a seriesof repeated jerks, as it would have to do to generate continuous tremor. In a homogeneousmedium,  a   fluid-driven   tensile   crack propagates stably,   without  generating   seismic waves, whereas in   an   inhomogeneous medium   it   can   undergo   an   isolated   episode of   rapid,  catastrophic growth, for example when approaching a free surface   or another crack, or when initially breaking out of a  magmachamber[$amraisand Julian, 1987].In a randomly  heterogeneousmedium, a crack might propagate jerkily, as  it encounters   regions of varying fracture toughness,   but this propagation would probably be highly erratic and irregular.  The intense earthquake swarms that occur in volcanic areas  may be caused   by such irregular crack propagation.  Aki   et al.   [1977] noted a third   difficulty with   crack  propagation mechanisms: they   would result in systematic  increasesin the dimensionsof the resonating bodies and  thus in systematic shifts of spectra with time toward lower  frequencies,which are not observed.   This inconsistencyled Aki et al. to propose a model involving a chain of cracks  connectedby narrow channelsthat are normally closedbut  open rhythmically   in response   to elevated magma pressure.  A   similar   argument   can   be   made   about   long-period  earthquakes. Seismological evidence often shows that   they  recur   thousands   of   times   within   a   small   volume,   which  remains fixed for long intervals, for example at   Redoubt  volcano,Alaska,   in 1989 and 1990 [Chouetet al., 1993].   If  they were excited by crack propagation, they would migrate  systematically with time.  Nonlinear   Oscillators Any   tremor   generation process must   necessarily be  nonlinear. A time-invariant   linear system cannot oscillate spontaneously, because   its   output   can   contain   only  frequencies that   are   present   in   its   input.   Tremor   is   an  oscillatory response to a steady   (near   zero   frequency)input (for example,stress,fluid pressure, or heat), so   a nonlinear  process   of some kind is essential to its occurrence.  Nonlinear   systems   are   more   difficult   to   analyze  mathematically   than linear ones. Tools and concepts such as impulse response,Green's functions, and spectral analysis that are effective in linear problems are of little use because

# Page 5

JULIAN:   VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY   FLUID   FLOW   11,863  the   superposition principle does not   apply. We   are thus  forced to rely heavily on numerical integration, qualitative  phase space analysis, and approximate methods such as  linearized approximations valid only in limited regions of phase   space.Nevertheless,there are many common features  in   the   qualitative   behavior   of   most   nonlinear   systems  [Feigenbaum,1980]. In   particular, dissipative   honlinear  oscillatorsthat obey ordinary differential equations   of third  or higher order can exhibit   "chaotic" aperiodic oscillations that are in many respects   indistinguishable from a random  process. Most   such systems undergo a   transition   from regular to   chaotic behavior in   similar   ways, through   a  sequenceof subharmonic bifurcations, often referred to as  the "period-doubling route to chaos"[Eckmann,   1981].   In  this process,   a static equilibrium state becomes   unstable as  nonlinear effects become stronger in response   to changes in  someparameter   (for example,the Reynoldsnumber   in fluid flow or the Rayleighnumber   in convection), and limit-cycle  oscillationsbegin. Initially, these oscillations   are simple, but  with   increasing nonlinearity a sequence   of subharmonics  appears, leading to   longer-period and   more complicated  oscillations, and then to chaotic oscillations.  Aki and Koyanagi [1981, p. 7096], in a study of deep  tremor in Hawaii, observed systematic variations in tremor  frequency that   correspond closely to   a   period-doubling  sequence:  One   of   our   most   interesting   findings   is   that   the  period   of   tremor   almost   always changes with   time  during a course   of a tremor episode. A typical major  episodestarts with high-frequency(5-   10 Hz) with  moderate amplitude,   grows into violent motion with  low frequency   (1.5- 3 Hz) dominating, and becomes  gradually weaker but with   sporadic returns of high- frequency vibrations near the end of the episode....  From   a visual   inspection, it   appears that   the   period  doubles approximately in a step-like manner, rather  than gradually increasing.  Aki and Koyanagi [1981]   attributed these   observations to  discontinuouschangesin the effective lengths of resonating  fluid-filled   cracks,   caused by   the   opening   and   closing  of   interconnecting channels. Period   doubling   offers an  alternative explanation.  Even   though   tremor   generation must   be   a   nonlinear  process,and even   though phenomenadiagnostic   of nonlinear  oscillation have been observed in tremor,   it   is not obvious  exactly what processis operating; severalphysically distinct  nonlinear mechanisms might   be   at   work.   The   recently  recognized universal characteristics of nonlinear systems,  though helpful for recognizingnonlinearity, are of less   help  in deducing   the details of the underlying mechanisms. In   this   paper   I   propose that   tremor   oscillations are  excited by a nonlinear instability that   arises when fluid flows through a constricted channel with deformable walls  (Figure 7), and I developa simplelumped-parameter model  of the   process. The   walls are elastic, radiation   damped, and respond   to the pressurechangesgenerated by nonlinear instability of fluid flow. In this process,   an increase in the  flow speed leads to a decrease   in fluid pressure   through the  Bernoulli   effect.   As   a   result   the   walls   move   toward   each  other and constrict the flow, causinga pressureincreaseand  forcing the channel open again. The processrepeats itself  cyclicly. The system's behavior depends on its geometry,  Figure 7.   Schematic diagram   of fluid flowingthrough an  irregular channel in a volcano.   If the flow at constrictions  is vigorous enough, it can excite sustained oscillations.  the pressure difference driving the fluid, and the physical  properties of the fluid and the wall rocks. With   increasing  driving pressure,this system   exhibits (1) steady flow (no pressure or wall oscillations), (2) simpleand complexlimit- cycleoscillations similarto harmonictremor,   and (3) chaotic  oscillations.   In the steady-flow regime, external disturbances can trigger   transient   oscillations resembling "long-period  earthquakes."

# Page 6

11,864   JULIAN:   VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY FLUID   FLOW  Flow-Induced   Oscillations  Many   familiar   phenomena involve flow-induced oscilla-  tions. For example, musical wind instruments and human  vocal cords are excited by nonlinear processes analogousto  the tremor mechanism proposed here. The history of inves-  tigation of wind instruments also has parallels to that   of  tremor.Fletcher   [1979,p. 64]   states"Somewhat surprisingly,  though the theory of wave   propagation   and resonance effects in the bores and finger holes of such instruments has been  examined in detail, comparatively little attention has been  given to the actual mechanism by which the sound is pro- duced and coupled   to the tube of the instrument." Similarly, in the investigation of volcanic tremor much more atten- tion has been given to analyzing the modes   of oscillation of  fluid-filledcracks[Chouetand Julian, 1985;   Chouet,1986],  cylindricalpipes and conduits   [Chouet,   1985],   and spher- ical chambers[Shima, 1958; Kubotera,1974; Crossonand Bame, 1985]   than to the questionof how suchoscillations  are   excited.  Another interesting example of flow-induced   oscillations  is provided by "Korotkov sounds"in mammalian circulatory systems,   which   are   used   routinely   by   physicians in  measuring   blood pressure   [Pedley, 1980]. These sounds  occur when a   limb   is compressed by an   inflatable   cuff,  pressurizedso that the arteries are closedduring part of the  cardiac cycle. A train   of oscillations, heard as a thump or  click, is generated at systole   each time the artery is forced  open by rising   blood pressure.Pedley [1980]formulateda  lumped-parameter model of Korotkov soundsas self-excited oscillations of collapsible fluid-transporting tubes, whose dynamics are described   by a third-order system   of ordinary  differential equations. Preliminary numerical investigations  of these equations showed that   they are subject to limit- cycle oscillations   similar to those of the lumped-parameter  tremor   model   described   below.  During eruptions, one might expect to see   direct evidence  of oscillating flow.   Mori et al. [1989]reportedsuchevidence  from Langila volcanoon New Britain, where puffing   sounds,  resembling those   from   a   steam   engine, were   observed together   with   fluctuating   glow   from   the   crater,   both  with frequencies   matching that   of simultaneously recorded  tremor.   Movies   of   Hawaiian   lava   fountains   often   show  pulsations occurring at   a rate of a few per second, but  apparently   no attempt   has been made to   compare their  frequency with that of tremor.  Mori   et al.   [1989] also reported increasesin tremor  frequency   by more than 50% over a time span of about a  minute at Langila, and it appears   from one   of their published seismogramsthat the frequency is inversely correlated with  the   tremor   amplitude.   Similar   increases by   more than  100% over about 10 min have been noted at Sakurajima  volcanoby Kamo et al. [1977],   although   it is not clear  whether this changeaccompanieda changein amplitude. If tremor involves   high-Q resonance,such frequency   changes  must be caused by rapid changes in resonator dimensions  or fluid properties. For a nonlinear oscillator that   is not  strongly mode   locked, however, variations of   frequency with amplitude are in general to be expected. Frequency- amplitude   systematics may   hold   promise as practically useful indicators of processes taking place in volcanoes.  The   efficiency of flow at   exciting oscillation depends  strongly on the   compliance of the   channel walls, which, in turn,   depends strongly on channel geometry. Changes in channel geometry are expected to cause changes   in the  associated   tremor, and such changes   are actually observed.  Commonly, in Hawaii and elsewhere,   lava first reachesthe surface   through newly formed dikes and erupts as a nearly  continuous   "curtain   of fire"   hundreds   to thousands   of meters  long. Then, over a period of a few days, the lava solidifies  in most parts of the dike and flow becomes   channeled into  a small number of vents of roughly circular cross section  [Richter et al., 1970; Swansonet al., 1979; Wolfe et al.,  1987].This change in geometry is   accompanied by a decrease  in tremor amplitude, consistent   with the fact that a tabular  channel has much more compliant walls than a cylindrical  one. A well-documented example is provided by the first 36  hours of the November 1959 eruption of Kilauea, when the  tremor amplitude dropped by a factor of 5, at the same   time  that the fountain height and volumetric eruption rate were  increasing slightly   [Eaton   et al., 1987]. Long-Period Earthquakes  The interpretation of tremor as a flow-inducedoscillation  suggests an   explanation   for   tremorlike   "long-period"  volcanicearthquakes.Self-excitedoscillationscan occur   only  for flow speeds above a critical threshold. Flow at   lower  speeds is steady, but   if disturbed, it   undergoes   decaying  oscillations before returning   to   the   steady state.   Long-  period events may   be   manifestations of   such transient  oscillations.   Possible   sources of   disturbances   to   steady  flow include ordinary earthquakes   near the fluid-carrying  channel,   heterogeneities in the fluid, and sudden   changes  in   the   channel network, such as the   establishment of  new   connections.   Observational   evidence   exists   for   the  first and last of these processes.Seismogramsof many  long-period eventsbeginwith small   high-frequency signals  that   appear to be ordinary earthquakes.   Figure 3 is an  examplefrom Mount St. Helens.Othershavebeenobserved  at   Redoubt volcano,   Alaska [Lahr et al., 1993], Long  Valley caldera,   California [Hill and Pitt,   1992], Mount  Spurt,   Alaskaand Galerasvolcano, Colombia(S. McNutt,  personalcommunication, 1993). Long-periodeventsoften  are accompaniedby acousticwavesin the air that originate  from volcanicvents at virtually the same time [Latter,  1979; McNutt, 1986; Mori et al., 1989]. A   suddengas  emission   would simultaneously   generate an air wave and  a pressuredisturbancein the vent. At   Galeras   volcano,  Colombia, simultaneoussudden gas emissions and long-  periodearthquakes havebeenobserved [Chouet, 1993]. The  sudden establishment   of a new connection   causes a sudden  change in the steady-flow conditions in the   plumbing system.  If   the   new   conditions   are   above   the   threshold   for   self-  excited oscillation, tremor begins suddenly.   Otherwise, a  transientlong-period eventoccurs. Figure4 shows excellent  candidates   for these   two   kinds   of occurrences.  The   duration   of transient   oscillations depends on how  closely   the flow conditionsapproach   the threshold for  continuous tremor.   Well   below   this   threshold,   transients  are short-lived,while near the threshold,they are of longer  duration   and may resemble"long-coda" eventssuchas   that  shown in Figure 5.  This explanationof long-codaearthquakes is physically  distinct   from   acoustic   resonance.   For   a   free   resonator  to produce long-duration   transients, it   must have high

# Page 7

JULIAN:   VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY   FLUID   FLOW   11,865  acousticreflection coefficientsand therefore high impedance  contrasts between the resonating fluid and the surrounding  rock.   The   duration   of   transients   in   a   resonator   is  conventionally expressed in terms of the figure of merit, Q.   Numerical   simulations   of   resonance in   fluid-filled  cracks yield   Q   values up to   about 20   [Chouet, 1992],  whereas observed long-coda events require   considerably  higher values. (The wave train in Figure 5 would imply  a   Q   of   about   40.)   In   contrast, transient   oscillations  of   a   fluid-transporting   channel are   prolonged by   power  input   from   the   flow.   Long-coda   events   are   naturally  expected phenomena intermediate   between short-duration  long-period earthquakes and continuous tremor.   They   do  not require special explanation.  Lumped-Parameter   Model of Tremor  Here I formulate a lumped-parameter model of the flow  of a viscousfluid through a constricted channel with elastic walls. A   linearized stability   analysis of steady flow gives  a quantitative   statement of the tremor threshold. For flow  rates above a critical threshold, the model shows tremorlike  limit-cycle oscillations   of the channel   wall and the fluid flow speed. For vigorous flow, the model also shows behavior qualitatively different from limit cycles,including a sequence of period-doubling subharmonic bifurcations, and aperiodic  chaotic oscillations associated with a strange attractor.  The channel walls are modeled as masses connected by  a spring   and a dashpot (Figure 8). The spring represents  the effect of the elastic stiffness of the surrounding rocks.  Modeling   the   effect   of   elastic-wave radiation   from   the  channel walls requires both inertial (mass) and viscous (dashpot)elements,in a proportionthat dependsupon the  frequency of vibration.   At   high frequency, the   radiation  impedance of the walls is a pure resistance,   correspondingto  h(O  P2  2 k   -/VSAr' 2M L   2 k  Pl   v(x,t)  Figure   8.   Lumped-parametermodel of the generation  of volcanic tremor.   Viscous, incompressible fluid flows in  x direction   from upstream   (bottom) to downstream(top)  reservoirthrough a channel   of length L with imperfectly  elastic walls, modeled as movable   but undeformable   blocks  of mass2M,   stiffness 2k, and dampingconstant2A (all  measuredper unit distancein the z direction). The model  is two-dimensional;all motion occursin the x-y   plane and is independent of z. The dynamical variables are the channel  thickness ]z(/:)andthe   fluidflowspeed v(x,  the dashpot alone, whereas at low frequenciesthe impedance  is purely   reactiveand corresponds to the massalone   [Morse  and Ingard, 1968, section 7.4]. Correspondingnumerical  computations are described below.  The   effects   of acoustic   resonance   in the   fluid-filled   channel  can be modeled by making the pressure at either end of the channel depend on the flow speed and its history. To be completely realistic, this functional dependence would have  to be complicated because of effects such as the dispersive  nature of propagationin a narrow channel   [Ferrazini and  Aki, 1987].   I omit acousticresonance effectsfrom the model  at   this   stage for the   following reason. Resonance would affect radiated waveforms by selectively amplifying certain  frequencies, and   feedback from   the   resonator would   also  lower the   tremor   threshold and affect tremor   frequencies through   mode   locking.   However,   these   effects   are   not essential to   the   excitation   of   oscillations by   flow.   The situation   may be likened to   that   of a clarinet   or similar  musical   instrument.   The   air   column   in   the   bore   makes  sound production   easier, greatly   influences the   timbre   of  sounds, and controls their   pitch,   but   these effects are not  fundamental to the generation of sound in the mouthpiece.  In this paper, I concentrate on the processby which tremor  is generated, and I   minimize the number of complicating factors. This   simplification helps by showing that   effects  such as regularly peaked spectra, which are often attributed to resonance in extended fluid bodies, can also be produced  by sourcesthat   lack acoustic resonators. Thus, separating  the problem into components helps us to recognize which  phenomena may be the results of resonanceand which may  have other explanations.  A complete dynamical magma flow model for a network of channels in a volcano would be described by a system  of partial   differential equations for the coupled flow of a  compressible   plastic fluid and the elastodynamic motion of  the wall rocks. Such a model would be complicated, large amounts of computer time would be needed to analyze it,  and the purely   numerical results probably   would provide little physical insight. Instead, I treat the massesand other parameters of the   model   as lumped,   so as to   deal with ordinary, rather   than   partial   differential   equations, and I  idealize the geometry and treat the fluid as incompressible  and   NewtonJan.   These   simplifications   affect   the   results  quantitatively.   For example, at shallow depths magma can  contain abundant vesiclesof gas, which greatly increase its compressibility. Because some tremor is generated at great depths, however, at pressures   at which a gas phase would  not be highly compressible, I conclude that   compressibility is not essential to tremor excitation and ignore its effects.  Refining the model is left for future studies.  Consider   two   reservoirs, filled   with   fluid   at   pressures  Pl   and P2 and connected by a channel of length   L   and thickness h,   through   which   the   fluid   can flow   in   the   x  direction   (Figure 8). The channelthicknessh can vary with  time   as the   walls deform in   the   y   direction   in   response to   changes in   the   fluid   pressure, their   behavior   being determined by effective masses2M, a damping constant 2A, and a spring constant 2k, all measured per unit thickness in the direction normal to Figure 8. The problem is taken to be two-dimensional; all motion occurs in the x-y   plane,  and all variables are independent of the z coordinate. This  approximation is appropriate for flow in dikes or sills, which typically have aspect ratios of several hundred.

# Page 8

11,866   JULIAN:   VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY   FLUID   FLOW  Kinematics   of Fluid   Flow  First,   I derive a kinematic relation connecting the flow speeds at   different   positions along the   channel, which  enablesus to restrict our attention to the speedat a single  position and thus to deal with ordinary, rather than partial, differential equations. This kinematic relation is based on  the equation of conservation   of mass for the fluid,  Ox (pvh) - -•(ph) ,   (1)  wherep is   the fluid   density,v(x,t) is   the flow speedaveraged  over the channel cross-sectionh, x is the spatial coordinate  along the channel,   measuredfrom an arbitrary origin, and t  is time. To find a reasonably   tractable model, I assumethat  the fluid is incompressible (p -- const)   and that the entire  wall surface moves in unison, so that the channel thickness  h is the samealongthe entire   channeland is a functionh(t) of time only.   Equation (1) then simplifies to  Ov  n• =   -h   (2)  (the dot indicatesdifferentiationwith respectto time),  which can be integrated with respect   to x to give  v(x, t)   = v(O, t)   - •x .   (3)  This   is the   desired kinematic   relation.   The   fluid   speed  everywhere in the channel is determined if h, •, and   the  speed at the origin are known. I place the origin midway  along the length of the channel.  Boundary Conditions  Boundary conditions   relate the pressuresand flow speeds  at the ends of the channel to the properties of the reservoirs.  Assume that   the   reservoir pressuresare constant away  from the channel entrances, in effect taking the radiation  impedances in the reservoirs to be zero. Also assume that  the reservoir   pressuresre]ate to the pressuresand speedsat  the endsof the channelby Bernoulli 's theoremin the form  p   + pv2/2 = const, appropriate forsteady inviscid flow, so  that  and  Pv2  p(-L/2, t)- Pl- •   (-L/2, t)  Lh]2 P (o t)+• =Pl -- •   V •  Pv•(L/2 t) p(L/2, t)   =   p2 - •   ,  P[v(O,t)-Lh] • - p2- •   •-•   ß  (4) (5)  Equations of Motion  The first equation of motion is based upon the law of  conservation   of momentum   in   the   fluid:  OvOv )   Op 12• p •+v•   -   Ox   n -•-v'   (•)  where r/ is viscosity.The last term representsthe viscous  drag   force exerted on   the   fluid   by   the   channel walls,  assuming laminar Hagen-Poiseuille flow. Time   and space  differentiation of v using(3) gives  h   12•) =   Pn   n2 v(0, t)-p,(0,t)  (7)  The fluid flow   speedappearingin (7) is evaluatedonly at x  -- 0, so the spatial argument will be omitted from here on.  The solutionof (7) satisfying the boundarycondition(4) is  p(x,t) -   Ph  +•-•   +p  [   1  p   Lh  q-Pl--•   Vq-•   (s)  Substitutingthis expression in the boundarycondition(5)  gives   the first equation of motion  1_• Pl -- P2 p/• +   v=   L   '   (9)  The secondequation   of motion is basedupon the law of  conservation   of momentum   for the channel walls. The   total  fluidpressure force Fp   exerted onthe   channel wallsurface is  obtained by substituting equation (9) intoequation (8) and  integrating over the surface:  =L[ PL2• 12   h  Fp(t) = / p(x, t)dx -LI2  L2( 12q 12   h2   2h   Pl   +P2  (10)  The fluid   pressure drivesthe elastic/damped response of the  channel   walls:  M• + AA + k(h- ho) = Fp,   (11)  where h0 is the equilibrium thicknessof the channelwith no  forces appliedto its walls.(If prestress is   present and   a finite  pressure is requiredto start openingthe channel,then h0 is  negative.) Substituting Fpfromequations (10)into(11)and  collectingterms   yieldsthe second equationof motion:

# Page 9

JULIAN:   VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY   FLUID   FLOW   11,867  M+ 1-•J   1-• h 2   2  +k(h- ho)- LIpx + p2PV•]. (12) 2   2  The   equations of motion, (9)   and (12),   control the  dynamics of this tremor model. They   constitute a third  order system of ordinary differential equations, and they  are nonlinear; the effective mass (coefficient of •), the  damping (coefficients of ]z and v), and the stiffness  (coefficient of h) all dependon h or v (or both). Solving  these equations analytically   is impractical   and probably impossible. Accordingly,   I   solve them   numerically   to understand their qualitative behavior, and I   use analytic  methods   to   determine   the   conditions   for   the   occurrence   of  flow-induced   oscillation.  Numerical   Solutions  As a first step in investigating the behavior of this tremor  model, I   integrate the equationsof motion (9) and (12)  numerically, using the step-size extrapolation method of  Bulirschand $toer [1966](seealsoPresset al. [1988]).  Parameter   Values  For the sake of illustration, I intend to model the flow of basaltic magma through a large channel. A wide variety  of other situationsmight have   been   chosen(suchas flowing water or gas,or a differentchannelgeometry),which   might  correspond   to   very different parameter values. Many   of  the needed values are poorly known. Therefore the results  illustrate   the qualitative kinds   of behaviorthat are possible,  but they are not the only onesthat might be realistic.  Consider a constricted channel of length L   --   10 m, unpressurized thicknessh0 -   1 m, fluid density   p -   2500 kg  m-3 (2.5 gcm-3), and viscosity r]- 500 Pas(5000 poise), a  valueappropriatefor basalticmelts   [Muraseand   McBirney,  1973].The stiffness k of the walls   can be estimatedusing  simple argumentsfrom elasticity theory and the observed  shapes of exhumed dikes. Let   w be the   dimension of the  channel, measuredin   the z direction (Figure 8).   This  dimensionis much larger than the channelthicknessh, and  in the modelit is taken   to be infinite.   The aspectratio w/h  of a two-dimensional pressurized dike is /•/(1 - y)p, where  p is the fluid pressurein excessof the remotely applied  compressirestress   normal to the channel wall, /•   is the  rigidity modulus   of the country rock, and l/is   its Poisson's  ratio [Pollard   et al., 1983].A pressure change5p therefore  changes the channel thickness by 5h •   wSp/l•, and so   the  effectivestiffnessper unit distance   in the z direction is  kdef 5f_ LSp _ L/•   (13) __   __   ,  5h   5h   w  Exhumeddikestypically haveaspectratios   in the rangefrom  100 to   1000, so w can range from about   100 to   1000 m.  The rigidity modulusft within volcanoes is highly variable.  Measured values for Hawaiian basalts range from about 5  to 40 GPa [Manghnani and Woollard,1968].Thus in our  example, k might range from about 0.05 to 4 GPa. I use a  value   k-   0.6 GPa. I first treat the walls   as   havinginertia but  no   damping(appropriate in the the low-frequency limit), so  A -   0. The mass per unit distance in the z direction, 2M,  isexpected to   beoftheorder ofpL•, soI takeM - 3 x 105  kg   m-1.  Many of these values   are highly uncertain. Most of them,  suchas the dimensionsL and h, probably vary from volcano  to volcano and within   a single channel. Quantities such as  the effectivemass   M and damping A are basedon simplified  representationsof reality. Therefore, although the computed results provide insight into the qualitative phenomena at  work, they are subject to quantitative uncertainty.  Initial   Conditions  Initially,   the fluid in the channel is at rest at pressure Px. This is the state that exists immediately after a crack  propagating from the upstream reservoir   has connected   with  the downstream reservoir but before the fluid has begun  flowing. The initial conditions are not critical; they affect  the transient responseonly slightly and have no effect on  the waveform of a limit-cycle oscillation.  Numerical   Results  Figure 9 shows the computed channel thickness h and  the fluid speedv as functionsof time for Pl -   10 MPa (100  bars)   andP2 = 0.1 MPa (1 bar .• atmospheric pressure). The  fluid, initially at rest, immediately begins   accelerating,   and  itsspeed begins to   approach a value exceeding 100m   s-1. At  the sametime, the pressure in the channeldrops,causing its  walls to closepartially and the channelthicknessto decrease.  However,   the system   does   not reach a state of steady flow  and constant channel   thickness.Instead, before h and v can  reachsteady   state values,tremor oscillations begin   to grow  and finally approach   a limit cycle.   These oscillationsrestrict  2  E   1  œ  o  15o  •   100  E  :•   50  O0   1   2   3   4   5  t, S  Figure   9.   Synthetic tremor computed by numerically integrating   the differential   equations   (9) and (12):   (top)  channel thicknessversus   time and (bottom) fluid speed  midway along channel versus   time.   Model parameters are  k -   600MPa,M -   3 x 105kg   m-1, /9-- 2500kg   m-3,  r/ -- 500 Pa s, Pl -- 10 MPa (100 bars),P2 = 0.1 MPa (1  bar), ho = I m, and L ----10 m.

# Page 10

11,868   JULIAN-   VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY   FLUID   FLOW  1.05   ' ' '   I ' ' ' '   I ' ' '   ' I ' ' ' ' I ' ' ' '  E 1.oo  0.95   '  5O  4O  •   30  E ß - 20  10  øo   I   2   3   4   5  t, s  Figure   10.   Same as Figure 9 except that Pl   -   3 MPa.  Note greatly expandedscalefor channelthickness (top).  the fluid flow; the final average flow rate is only about one  half   of what   it   would   be   if tremor   did   not   occur.  Figure 10 showscomputed results for a case   the same as that in Figure 9, except that Pl has the lower   value of 3 MPa  (30bars). In this case,   oscillations excited by the starting  transient die out with   time,   and the system approaches a  state of constant flow speed and channel thickness.  These results suggest that   both continuous tremor   and  long-period events can be understood as oscillations of a  channel transporting magmatic fluid, excited in different  ways. Continuous tremor   is excited by fluid   flow above  a critical   threshold, and long-period events are transient  oscillationsexcited by an external disturbance   when the flow  is   below   this   threshold.   Possible   sources   of   such   external disturbances   are   discussed   above.  Tremor   Conditions  The model can exhibit two different types of behavior:  oscillations that   grow and approach a stable limit   cycle  (tremor), and transient oscillationsthat decay,   leading to  steady flow. To determine the conditions under which each  type of behavior occurs, I first find the steady-flow solution  to the equations of motion (9) and (12), and then conduct  linearized stability   analysis to   determine whether   small  perturbations from this solution grow or decay.  Steady Flow Solution  The equations describing steady flow with h -   hs and v  --   vs   are  and  12r/   Pl -   P2  h• 2v8-   L   (14)  k(hs -   ho) =LIP• + P2 pv•2](15) 2   2   '  and are obtained from the equationsof motion (9) and (12) by setting all time derivativesto zero. Equation (14)  expresses the balance between   the viscousdrag force   and the  force   from the reservoirpressure difference.Equation (15)  expressesthe balance between elastic and pressure   forces   on  the channel walls. To determine the steady-flow solution,  the variable vs can be eliminatedfrom equations(14) and  (15) to give   a quartic   equationin hs,   whichis, in principle,  solvableanalytically, but is easier   to solvenumerically. It can  be shown   that for r/, L, Pl, P2, k, and p all positive, there is  exactly   one   physicalsolution(hs > 0) when   the condition  L  kho q- •(Pl   q- P2) >   0   (16)  is satisfied;   there are no physical solutions   otherwise. This equation expressesthe requirement that the fluid pressure  be able to overcomethe spring force and hold the channel  open.  Instability of Steady Flow  To decide whether tremor   occurs, we must determine  whether the steady flow solution is stable, so that   small perturbations from it   die out with   time, or unstable, so  that small perturbations grow. To answer   this question,   I  linearizethe equationsof motion (9) and (12) to obtain  a system of linear ordinary differential equations for small  variations5h and 5v about the steadyflow   state:  d  5h   0   1   0   5h  k   A + a   pLv•  5•   -M+m   M+m   -M+m   5•  5v   2av•   a  mh8   0   5v m  (17)  where we define the quantities  and  def pL3  m- 12h•   (18)  defr/L3  a-- hJ'   (19)  which have   the followinginterpretations.As h changes, the  amount of fluid in the channel   must change,so acceleration  of the channel walls requires   a change   in the flow speed,  and the fiuid's   inertia   contributes   an extra   amount   m to the  effective   mass of the walls. The fiuid's viscosityproduces  anadditional force ofmagnitude a]•resisting themotion of  the walls, so a is the fiuid's contributionto the damping   of wall motion. Thesecontributionsto the effectiveparameters  of the wall can be seen directly in the secondequation of  motion   (12).  The steadyflow   solutionof the equations of motion   (9)  and   (12) is   unstable if andonlyif the   linearized system (17)  has a growing solution. The characteristic   equation of the  system is  A 3   q-C2A 2   q-CIAq-C0- 0 ,   (2o)  with   coefficients

# Page 11

JULIAN:   VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY   FLUID   FLOW   11,869  C0 derak [ 2pLvs2 ]   (21a) - m(M+m) 1+ kh,] '  dera(A + a) +km  C1 -   m(M +m) '   (2lb)  _   a   (21c) C2 der A+a t   , M+m   m  Thesecoefficients are all positive,so   all the roots of equation  (20)   areeithernegative or complex. Therefore the   steady  flow solutionof the equations of motion (9) and (12) is  unstable if and only if there   is a pair of complex conjugate  rootsin the right half plane.By usingeither   the Routh-  Hurwitz theorem[Saaty   and Brain, 1981; Gantraacher,  1960], or   more directarguments [DenHattog,1985,section  7.2],thisinstability condition canbeshown to   beequivalent  to C1C2-Co < 0. This is the conditionfor tremor to occur  in our   model,and   by using equations (21), it canbe   written  Rdef   1+   2r•   (22) --   (l+r2)(l+r3)  where we define   the followingdimensionless parameters:  derpLvs 2  rl-   kh8   (23a)  def (A +a)m   (23b) r2   = (M+   m)a  dera(A + a)  ra=   km   '   (23c)  These parameters have simple physical interpretations. Parameter r•   is the ratio of the kinetic energy of the fluid  in the channelto the work that must be done against   the  spring to change the channel thickness by the amount hs.  Parameter   r2 is a function   of the relative   contributions   of  the fluid to the total   effective mass and damping of the  walls; it is increased by the fiuid's relative contribution to  the mass, and it is decreasedby the fiuid's contribution to the damping. The product r2r3 is a dimensionless measure of the total damping.  It   can also be shown•hat at the onset   of instability  (when the two complex   roots are on the imaginary axis)  the frequency   of oscillations,co,is given by  +   (24) co2=C•= M+•  and is higher than the frequency for a simple undamped  mass spring system, [k/(M q-m)]•/2. Notice that   this  behavior differs from that   of a classical linear oscillator,  for which damping lowers   the natural frequency.Nonlinear  oscillators are more complicated, because their   frequency  depends on their amplitude.   Equation (24) appliesonly at  the onset of instability and thus describes   a situation in  which   rl and/or r2 vary simultaneously with r3 sothat R -  1.   Notice also that in the   absence of   fluidflow(vs   -- 0, R < 1), the   linearized equations of   motion (17)   docorrespond to  a classicallinear oscillator,with  k  =   -   ß   (25) M+m  Figure 11 illustrates the instability condition of equation  (22) graphically. Each curve   gives,for a particular   value   of  r3, the relation between r•   and r2 when R =   1, that is, at  a state of marginalinstability (incipienttremor). If a point  lO• ::: a(_• = lOOO lO 2  101   10 1o   o   1   UNSTABLE  STABLE  10   '1   0.1  10   '2   0.01  10-3  h  D  INCREASING  10'•0-4 10-3 10-2 10-1   10 0   101   10 2   10 3   10 4  (A + a) m  r2=   (M+rn)a  Figure 11. Conditions for   occurrence of tremor,fromequation (22). Eachcurvecorresponds to a state  of marginalinstability (onsetof tremor) for a fixed value   of ra. The regionsof instability (tremor) lie abovethe curves.The parameters r•, r2, and ra are dimensionless numbers definedin equations (23).

# Page 12

11,870   JULIAN:   VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY FLUID   FLOW  (r!,r2)   lies below   the curve appropriate   to the value of r3,  then steady flow is stable; if it lies above, it is unstable and tremor occurs. For example, in the unstable case illustrated in Figure 9, with the upstream pressure Pl   --   10 MPa,   the  dimensionlessparameters have the values rl   -   0.46, r2 -  0.63, and r3 -- 0.0053 and R -   1.55. When pl is lowered to 3 MPa,   the values become r•   -- 0.41, r2 -   0.092, and r3 --  0.0022,   R -   0.83, and steadyflow is stable   (seeFigure 10).  The critical pressure   for incipient instability is p•   -   4.82  MPa, for which r• -- 0.42, r2 -- 0.21, and r3-- 0.0027 and R  •   1.  As fluid flows along a channel, it encountersvariations in the channel thickness, which cause the flow speed to vary.  Figure   11 can be used to determine where oscillations can  occur most easily. In steady flow, the total fluid discharge  hsvs is the same everywhere along the channel, so vs is  inverselyproportionalto hs.   From the definitions(18), (19),  and(23)it follows thatmc•   h•- • a   c•   h•3 rl c•   h• -3 andr2  c• hs a, with -1   _•o•_•3. Thusas   hsvariesalongthe channel,  r• and r2 move along a line whose slope is between -1   and  3, as shown   in the inset in Figure 11. If r3 is small, as it is in  the examples treated   here, then the position of the critical  curve in Figure 11 is insensitive to r3 and tremor occurs most  easily at places   where r• is greatest and hs is smallest. This analysis justifies the statement made earlier, that   tremor  occurs most readily at constrictions in the channel.  Period Doubling and Chaos  When,   as in   the   case described above, the   channel  walls are modeled as massesconnectedby springs,without  radiation damping   (A -   0), then the numericalexperiments  yield stable steady flow without oscillation and stable limit-  cycle oscillations. Experiments with   a variety of parameter  values fail to produce any behavior more complicated than  limit-cycle oscillations.   It is not obvious   why this should   be  so.   Accordingto the Poincar•-BendixsonTheorem [Jordan and Smith, 1983], limit-cycle oscillations are the   most  complicated possible behavior for systems of second   order, but   no   such general restriction   applies for   higher-order systems. The lack of complicated behavior may mean that,  when A   -   0, a second-ordersystem   exists   that is equivalent  to the equationsof motion (9) and (12). When   damping of   the   walls is   included (A   >   0),  however,   more   complicated   types   of   behavior   result,  including a classicalcascadeof period-doubling subharmonic  bifurcations   leading   to   chaotic   oscillations.   Figure   12  illustrates this behavior, showing synthetic time series of  h(t),   like those in the upper parts of Figures 9 and 10,  computed with M-   0 and A --- 10 ? kg m-•   s-•   for  various values of driving pressure pl.   For p•   z   13 MPa,  the long-time motion, after the starting transient has died out, is a simple limit-cycle oscillation resembling that   in  Figure 9. The corresponding spectrum(Figure 13) consists  dominantly of a spectral line at the fundamental frequency  of the limit   cycle. As the driving pressure is raised above  about 15.4 MPa,   a subharmonic with a frequency half that  of the fundamental appears, and alternate cyclesof the time serieshave different shapes.The secondtime seriesin Figure 12, for p• -- 16.0 MPa, showsthis phenomenon.The signal   is  still periodic but is more complicated and has a period about  twice as great as before. Such a signal is often referred to as having "period two." At still higher pressures,subharmonics of higher orders appear, producing periodic signals whose  1  o  I   16.o  o  1   17.5  o  I   18.o  o  I   ß  o  o   5   lO   15  t, s  Figure12. Synthetic tremor timeseries (channel thickness h versus time)showing types of behavior  that occurfor different values of drivingpressures p• whenradiationdamping of motionof channel walls  is   included in the   model. Modelparameters areasin Figures 9 and10except 2V/---- 0 andA -   10 ?   kg  m-• s-1. Firsttimeseries: simple limitcycle. Second timeseries: limitcycle withone subharmonic  ("period two").Thirdtimeseries: limitcycle withtwosubharmonics ("period four").Fourth timeseries:  chaoticbands("noisylimit cycle"). Fifth time series:chaos.

# Page 13

JULIAN:   VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY   FLUID   FLOW   11,871  -lOO  03 -lOO  (1)   o  -• -lOO  (.)   o  -lOO  -lOO  ]  0   ß  1   100 10  Frequency, Hz  Figure   13. Spectra of   the   synthetic tremor shown in Figure12,   computed for   timeseries 200s (105  samples)long,using   Welch's [1967]methodof averaging periodograms appliedto 8192-samplewindows. fundamental period   doubles repeatedlyto valuesof about   4, 8, 16, ...   times   that of the initial limit cycle   ("period   four," "periodeight," etc.). The third time seriesin Figure 12, for  Pl -- 17.5 MPa, has undergonetwo period doublingsand is  of   periodfour.Notethat the   peaks(alsothe   troughs) in each  of theseperiodictime seriestake on only a finite number   of  distinct   values,which   is the sameas   the repetition "period." The   appearance of each new subharmonic requires a  smaller increasein pl, and as   p• approachesa value of about  17.9, the number   of subharmonics increases without   limit.  Increasing p• beyond this limit point causesthe behavior  to become aperiodic and chaotic. The fourth and fifth time  seriesin Figure 12 show examples   of chaotic behavior. One of the   most important   characteristics of chaotic  behavioris exponentialgrowthof small   perturbations,which causesnearly identical initial conditionsto evolve rapidly  into different time histories.   This extreme sensitivity to  initial   conditions wasexhibited in an   unexpected wayduring  the computation of the time series in   Figure 12. The  fifth time seriesexhibits a striking run of nearly periodic  oscillationsin the interval from about 5 to 6.5 s, whereas  time   series from earlier computer runs do not.   The   first  10 or so oscillationsare visually identical in the two cases,  but within 3 or 4 s the time seriesdivergenoticeably.This difference arises because the earliercomputations usedsingle  (24-bit) precision arithmetic,whereas thosefor Figure 12  used   double (53-bit) precision.The resultingintroduction  of "noise" at a level of about one_part in 8 million leads within a few cyclesto differences as large as the oscillation  amplitude.  Figure 14 showsstereoscopic views   of the orbits in phase  space corresponding   to the time series in Figure 12. The  first three views (Figures   14a-14c) correspond to periodic  oscillations (limit cycles),and eachorbit is a simpleclosed  curve, with the number of loopsequal to the "period." The  fourth   and fifth views(Figures14d   and 14e)   correspond to  chaotic   oscillations.  In Figure 14d, the orbits are restrictedto a band, which  has a double loop reminiscent   of the loops for the "period  two" limit cycle of Figure 14b. The system's   behavior under  these conditions   may be thought of as a "noisy   limit cycle."  In the fifth view, Figure 14e, the bands have broadened until  they   overlap and form   a single band,   in which,   however, detailed but complicated structure can still be seen.  The   chaotic orbits   in   Figure   14e are   controlled   by   a  strangeattractor of RSssler type [RSssler,1976].The orbits lie in (and densely cover)a band,   whichfoldsoveronto   itself  in the lower left part of the figure. Because of this folding, it is possible   for two orbits that are widely separated during one cycle to be close   together in the next cycle. The folding is also responsible for the fact that   the oscillations remain  finite in amplitude,   despite the exponential divergence of adjacent orbits. It   can be seen that   the strange attractor cannot consist of any finite number of sheets, because   after  each folding the number would double. The   attractor   is a fractal object, consisting of an infinite number of sheets.  A   useful way to   illustrate   the   fractal   structure of the  attractor   is to   construct   a Poincar•   section, which   shows  the   points   where   a   finite   portion   of   the   orbit   crosses a plane in phase space. Figure   15 shows a Poincar•   section  corresponding to the bottom time series in Figure 12. The  particu!arplaneusedhereis the h-v coordinate plane,on  which h --   0. Thus each point gives the values of h and  v corresponding to a peak or trough in the time series of  h(t).   The folding   of the attractor is clearly visible on the  left side of Figure   15a. Enlarged views of portions of the  section(Figures   15b and 15c) showsmaller-scale folds   and  illustrate   that   the   attractor   consists   of an infinite   number   of  sheets.  One   commonly   used measure   of   the   "shape"   of   an  attractor   is its fractal dimension. For limit   cycles, such as  those shown in Figures 14a-14c, for example, this dimension  is one. I have estimated the dimension in the fully chaotic  regime (Figure 14e) by applying the correlation method

# Page 14

11,872   JULIAN: VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY FLUID FLOW  h  Figure 14. Stereoscopic views oforbits in   phase space corresponding to   thefive time series in   Figure  12.Theh axis points outofthepage and totheright, thev axis points into thepage and totheright,  and the ]•axis points upward. Inthe third view, the starting transient isomitted for clarity.  of Grassberger and Procaccia[1983]to a 10,000-sample  sequence of valuesof h, sampledat 0.005-s   intervals,and  I obtaineda value   of 1.93 q- 0.01. This value   is evidently  too   low; the   attractor's   dimension must   be   >   2.0.   The  reason   for the discrepancyis that the correlation method  samples points alonga dynamicalorbit. This path doesnot  sample the attractor   uniformlybut visitssome regions more  frequently than others.Grassberger and Procaccia [1983]  arguethat this samplingbias   givesa valuethat is actually  more descriptive of the dynamics than the more formally  defined   Hausdorff   dimension.   The   correlation   dimension  has the further advantageof being determinablefrom an  observed time series, suchas a seismogram. Obviously, the  dimensiondependson the parameter   valueschosen.I leave  for the futurean investigation of this   dependence.  Evolution   of Behavior  Figure 16 summarizesthe behavior   of the model as the  drivingpressure Pl is varied.This figurewasgenerated  by numerically integrating the equations of motion (9)  and (12) for 800 equallyspaced values of Pl and,   for  each value, plotting the   local maxima and minima of  h(t), that   is,   the   values on   the   Poincar• section •(t) =  0,   that   occur within   100 s. There   are   about   1000 such  extrema for each time series;the first 100 are omitted

# Page 15

JULIAN: VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY FLUID   FLOW   11,873  Figure   14.   (continued)  from the plot to eliminate the initial transients. For low pressures,the flow is asymptotically steady, and h takes  on a singlevalue.   At Pl = 10.2 MPa, steadyflow becomes  unstable,a limit-cycle   oscillationappears,and the curve  bifurcates. For 10.2   <• pl   <• 15.4 there are two curves,  corresponding to the peaks and troughs   of simple limit-  cycleoscillations like   the oneshown at the top of Figure   12.  A succession of further such   "pitchfork"bifurcations[May,  1976]marksthe appearances of subharmonic respolases of  higherorders. The pressure increments required to produce  successive bifurcations   decrease,and their ratios approach  the universalconstant•   = 4.669...   of Feigenbaum [1978;  1980]. As   discussed above, this   geometric series approaches  a limit or "accumulation point" at about 17.9 MPa, beyond  which the   behavior   becomes chaotic. For p•   in   a narrow  range   slightly   abovethe chaosthreshold,there occursan  "inverse cascade," whose time series are "noisylimit cycles."  In this regime,the peak and trough   valuesare restricted  to discrete "bands" of finite   width.   The   successivepeaks  and troughsvisit these   bands   in a cyclic   order, but the  actual valueswithin each   band vary chaotically.Figure 14d  shows   an attractor with two such bands, correspondingto  the fourth time series in Figure 12. The bands become  broader   with increasingp•, and adjacent bands overlap,  until at   about 18.5 MPa   the peak (and trough) values  becomedenselydistributed over a single   band. Within this  fully chaotic regime, however, the behavior still exhibits  several kinds of regularity. The edgesof the chaotic bands  are still evident as darker regions,becausethese   valuesoccur  more frequently than others. More surprisingly, for p•   in  certain narrow   "windows," there is a return   to   periodic  behavior but with   periods that   are no longer powers of  2, as they were below the chaos threshold. Within   each  window, the periodic behavior reverts to chaos   through a  new subharmonic period-doubling cascade, although this  behavior is not clearly resolvable   in Figure 16.  For p•   above about 21 MPa,   the system evolves in an  unexpectedway, passingthrough a reverseperiod-doubling  cascadeback to a "period two" limit-cycle oscillation. Not  all   nonlinear systems behave in this way, and it   is not  yet clear why our tremor model does so. The manner in  which the evolution of the dynamics dependson the choice  of parameter values is obviously a   rich field for future  investigation.  The existenceof a strangeattractor indicatesthat, despite its apparently random appearance,   the chaotic time series  in Figure 12 contain   a high degreeof order. A more   striking  demonstration of this fact is provided by the   "first-return

# Page 16

11,874   JULIAN:   VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY FLUID   FLOW  2OO 150   -  164.9  164.8  164.7 0.0  164.780  E 164.779  I  /  164.778  0.5   1.0  h, rn  \   _ --  _   "\   _  _  \   _  -   k,   -  \   -  \   _  -   ,  _   \   _  ß  -   \..   -  _   •   _  \   _  •1   .........   I,,,,,,,,,   I,,,,,,,].,   I,'   .......   ,I,,,,-  0.888   0.889   0.890   0.891   0.892  h, m  ,   ,   ,   ,   I   ,   ,   ,   ,   ,   ,   ,   f   ,   I   •   ,   f   •   •   ,   ,   ,   ,',1   ,   ,   ,   ,  0.88962   0.88963   0.88964  h, m  map" in Figure 17, whichshows the valueof the nth peak,  hn, as a functionof the immediatelypreceding peak, hn-1.  The resultingset   of pointsis close to a simplecurve,which  enables   values to be predicted one cycle into the future.  In fact, period-doubling cascades and chaosof the sort I  havebeendescribing are obtainedfrom the iteration of any functionthat has a quadraticextremum   [May, 1976;   Berge et al., 1984]. Spectra  Figure 13 showsspectraof the synthetictremor signalsin  Figure 12. The first spectrum, correspondingto a simple  limit   cycle, consists primarily   of   a   narrow peak   at   a  fundamental frequencyf0 •   5 Hz, and, becausethe signal is not   a   perfect sinusold, small peaks at   harmonics of this frequency. The second and third   spectra correspond  to   higher-order limit   cycles and have additional peaks  corresponding to the subharmonics at fo/2 and fo/4 and  the higher harmonics of these frequencies.There is also  more power in the harmonics of the fundamental. In   the  final two cases,   which correspond to chaotic behavior, the subharmonic peaks have become broader and the spectra include a continuous component as well as peaks. In   the  fourth spectrum, for the "noisy limit cycle," all the peaks  from the   "period four" limit   cycle can still be seen, but  for fully developed chaos(fifth spectrum)only thosepeaks  representingthe simple limit cycle are resolvable.For still  more chaotic cases, even these peaks disappear in   the  continuous   "noise."  Observational   Tests   of   the   Model  The tremor-generation mechanism proposed here can be tested in several   ways. Direct observationsof magmatic fluid  flow made during eruptions provide opportunities to obtain  several   kinds   of   data.   Pulsation   rates   of   lava   fountains   and  gas emissions can be compared with   tremor   frequencies. Observed fluid   properties, flow speeds, and channel sizes  can   be   used to   predict   tremor   amplitudes,   frequencies, and waveforms. Qualitative   observations of this kind have  already been made in   the   early   stages of Hawaiian-type  eruptions:   as   "curtains of fire"   change to   lava fountains and vents evolve from tabular   to less compliant cylindrical  shapes,   tremor amplitudes are observed   to decreasegreatly.  These   changes in   channel   geometry   should   also cause  systematic increasesin   tremor frequency. (Quantitative  prediction of these changes will   require that   the tremor  model   be extendedto cylindricalgeometry.)  The tremor model predicts that long-period earthquakes  should   have simple sourcetime functions   resemblingdamped  sinusolds, like the   synthetic   time   series in   Figure   10. In  some cases,such simple behavior is evident on seismograms  (Figure 5). More complicatedseismograms (Figures   3 and 4,   for example) presumably result when simple source  time   functions are obscured by wave propagation effects.  Figure 15. (a) Poincar•section showing intersections of a  finite portion   of the phaseorbit of Figure 14e   with the h-v  plane, on which •(t) - 0. (b)View ofregion enclosed inbox  in Figure 15a, enlarged225x.   (c) View of regionenclosed  in box in Figure 15b, enlarged 165x.

# Page 17

JULIAN:   VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY   FLUID   FLOW   11,875  E  1.5 1.0  0.5 I   i   i   i   i   I   i   i   !   i   ]   i   i   i  _  0.0• 0   15   20   25   30  p•, MPa  Figure   16.   Bifurcation   diagram showingchangesin  qualitative behavior of tremor model as driving pressure  Pl increases. Other parameters are as in Figures12-15.  Unfortunately, propagation effects are seldom known well enough to enable source   time functions to be determined accurately at tremor frequencies.A promising alternative approachis to take advantageof the tendency   of long-period  earthquakesto recur many times in nearly the same place  to remove   propagation effectsempirically. The rapidly advancing discipline of nonlinear dynamics  provides many potentially useful new ways of analyzing  tremor.   For   example, examination   of   seismograms and  spectra may provide further evidence for period doubling  in the evolution from periodic to chaotic tremor, similar  to that found by Aki and Koyanagi [1981]   for Hawaiian  E  1.0  0.5  0.5   1.0  h, rn  Figure 17. Returnmap-forchaotic oscillations (Figure12,  bottom). The ordinate   givesthe value   of the nth peak, and  the abscissa givesthe valueof the (n-1)th peak.  deeptremor. Systematicrelationsbetweentremor amplitude  and frequency   may be a sourceof quantitative information  about sourceparameters. With   high-quality seismicdata it  should be possible to determine characteristics of phase- space attractors   controlling tremor.   Constructing return maps like   the   one in   Figure   17 is one of the   simplest  approaches. Grassberger and Procaccia's [1983]method   of  determining the fractal dimension   of an attractor, discussed above, is another. One of the most unequivocal approaches  is the use of Poincar•   sections like those in Figure   15 to  display the topological structure of an attractor.  Conclusions  Many characteristicsof volcanic tremor can be explained  as   flow-induced   oscillations   in   channels   transporting  magmatic   fluid.   These   oscillations   are   excited   by   a  nonlinear process analogous to the excitation   mechanism  of   wind   musical   instruments   and   human   vocal   cords.  "Long period" volcanic events can be explained as similar  oscillations of   the   same fluid-carrying   channels, excited by   external   disturbances when the   flow cannot   sustain  continuous tremor.   A   lumped-parameter   model   of   this tremor   mechanism,   ignoring   resonance effects   in   the  channels, gives a third-order system of nonlinear ordinary  differential equations. Numerical experiments show   that this  system can exhibit steady flow without oscillations, simple  limit-cycle   oscillations,   and   a   classical period-doubling  cascade of more complicated limit   cycles leading to chaos controlled   by   a   RSssler attractor.   Both   the   time   series  and the spectra computed for this model strongly resemble  observed   tremor   data.   The   threshold   condition   for   the excitation   of continuous   tremor   involves   three   dimensionless  numbers,   namely, (1) the ratio of the kinetic energy of  the   fluid   to   the   work   needed   to   deform   the   channel   walls  elastically,(2) the relative contributionof the fluid to the  effectivemass   and damping   of the channelwalls, and (3)  the damping. The tremor model proposed here does not take account  of   acoustic   resonance   in   the   fluid   within   the   channel.   The  peaked spectra often interpreted as   evidenceof resonanceare instead seen   simply as characteristic of periodic oscillations, which   can   be   explained   by   nonlinear   mechanisms not involving acoustic resonance. Resonance probably   occurs and has significant quantitative effects on real tremor, but the occurrence and qualitative   features of tremor   can be explained without it.  Acknowledgments. During this work, I   had valuable  discussionswith   Jerry Eaton, and benefited greatly from  his extensive knowledge about Hawaiian volcanoes. Steve McNutt's knowledge   about the rest of the world's volcanoes, and tremor   in particular,   were always generously shared  and valuable. Leif Wennerberg was a source   of insight and  references on the subject of nonlinear dynamics. Bernard Chouet, Gillian   Foulger, David   Harlow,   David   Hill,   Steve  McNutt,   David Pollard, Charles Sammis, Paul Segall, and  Randall   White   made   many   helpful   suggestions. Robert  KoyanagiprovidedFigure 6. Fred Fisher helped   with the  reproductionof Figure 6. I am grateful   for Eduard Berg's  detailed and constructive review, which led to substantial  improvements   in the paper.

# Page 18

11,876   JULIAN: VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY FLUID   FLOW  References  Aki,   K.,   and R.   Y.   Koyanagi,   Deep volcanic tremor   and magma   ascent mechanism under   Kilauea,   Hawaii,   J.  Geophys.Res., 86, 7095-7110,   1981.  Aki, K., M. Fehler, and S. Das, Source   mechanism   of volcanic  tremor: fluid-driven crack models and their application to  the 1963 Kilauea eruption, J. Volcanol.Geotherm.Res., 2,  259-287,   1977.  Berge, P., Y.   Pomeau, and C. Vidal,   Order Within Chaos, 329 pp., John Wiley, New York, 1984.  Bulirsch, R., and J. Stoer, Numerical treatment of ordinary  differential equations by extrapolation   methods, Numer.  Math.,   8, 1-13,   1966.  Chouet,   B.,   Ground   motion   in   the   near field of a fluid-  driven crack and its interpretation in the study of shallow  volcanic tremor,   J. Geophys.Res., 86, 5985-6016,   1981.  Chouet, B., Excitation of a buried magmatic pipe: A seismic  source model for volcanic tremor,   J. Geophys.Res., 90,  1881-1893,   1985.  Chouet,   B.,   Dynamics   of   a   fluid-driven   crack   in   three  dimensions by the   finite   difference method,   J. Geophys.  Res., 91, 13,967-13,992,   1986.  Chouet, B., A seismic model for the source of long-period events and   harmonic tremor,   in   Volcanic Seismology,  IAVCEI   Proceedings in   Volcanology,vol. 3, edited by P. Gasparini et al., pp. 133-156, Springer Verlag, New York,  1992.  Chouet, B., and B. R.   Julian, Dynamics of an expanding  fluid-filled   crack,   J.   Geophys. Res., 90,   11,187-11,198,  1985.  Chouet,   B.   A.,   Volcano seismology as an   approach to  eruption forecasting, Nature, in press, 1994.  Chouet, B. A., R. A. Page, C. D. Stephens,   J. C. Lahr, and J. A. Power, Precursory swarms   of long-period events at  Redoubt volcano (1989-1990), Alaska: Their origin and  use as a forecasting tool,   J. Volcanol.   Geotherm.Res., in  press, 1994.  Crosson, R. S., and D. A. Bame, A spherical source   model  for low frequency volcanic earthquakes, J. Geophys.Res.,  90, 10,237-10,247,   1985.  Den   Hartog,   J.P.,   Mechanical Vibrations, 436 pp.,   Dover, New York,   1985.  Dzurisin,   D.,   J. M.   Donnelly-Nolan,   J. R.   Evans, and S.  R. Walter,   Crustal subsidence, seismicity, and structure  near Medicine Lake volcano, California,   J. Geophys.Res.,  96, 16,319-16,333,   1991.  Eaton,   J.P.,   Crustal structure and volcanism in Hawaii,   in  The Crust of the Pacific Basin, Geophys.Monogr. Ser., vol.  6, edited by G. A.   Macdonald and H. Kuno, pp. 13-29,  AGU,   Washington, D.C.,   1962.  Eaton,   J.P.,   D.   H.   Richter,   and H.   L.   Krivoy,   Cycling of  magma between the summit reservoir and Kilauea   Iki lava lake during the   1959 eruption of Kilauea volcano,  in Volcanism in Hawaii, edited by R. W.   Decker, T. W. Wright,   and P. H.   Stauffer,   U.S. Geol. Surv. Prof. Pap.,  1350, 1307-1335,   1987.  Eckmann,   J.-P.,   Roads   to   turbulence   in   dissipative  dynamical systems, Rev. Mod. Phys., 53, 643-654,   1981.  Fehler, M.,   Observations of volcanic tremor   at Mount   St.  Helens volcano, J. Geophys. Res., 88, 3476-3484, 1983. Fehler, M.,   and B. Chouet, Operation of a digital seismic  network   on   Mt.   St.   Helens   volcano   and   observations  of long period seismic events that   originate under the  volcano, Geophys. Res. Lett., 9, 1017-1020, 1982.  Feigenbaum, M.   J.,   Quantitative   universality for a class of nonlinear transformations, J. Statist. Phys., 19, 25-52,  1978.  Feigenbaum,M. J., Universal behavior in nonlinear systems,  Los Alamos Sci., 1, 4-27,   1980.  Ferrazzini, V.,   and K. Aki, Slow waves   trapped in a fluid- filled infinite crack: Implications for volcanic tremor, J.  Geophys.Res., 92, 9215-9223,   1987.  Ferrick, M. G., A. Qamar, and W. F. St. Lawrence, Source mechanismof volcanictremor, J. Geophys. Res.,   87, 8675-  8683, 1982.  Fletcher,   N.H.,   Excitation   mechanisms in woodwind and  brass instruments, Acustica,43, 63-72,   1979.  Gantmacher,   F. R., Matrix Theory,2 vols.,650 pp., Chelsea,  New York,   1960.  Grassberger,   P.,   and   I.   Procaccia,   Characterization   of  strange attractors,   Phys. Rev. Lett., 50, 346-349,   1983.  Havskov, J., S. De la Cruz-Reyna, S. K. Singh, F. Medina, and C. Gutierrez, Seismicactivity related to the March-  April,   1982 eruptions of E1 Chichon volcano, Chiapas,  Mexico, Geophys. Res. Lett., 10, 293-296,   1983.  Hill, D. P., and A.M.   Pitt, Long-period earthquakes   at mid-  crustal depths beneath the western margin of Long Valley  Caldera, California (abstract), Eos Trans.AGU,  Fall Meeting suppl., 343, 1992.  Hill,   D.   P., and J. J. Zucca, Constraints on the structure of Kilauea and Mauna Loa volcanoes, Hawaii, and some  implications for seismo-magmaticprocesses, in Volcanism in Hawaii, edited by R. W. Decker, T. W. Wright, and P.  H.   Stauffer,   U.S. Geol. Surv. Prof. Pap.,   1350, 903-934,  1987.  Hofstetter, A.,   and S. D. Malone, Observations of volcanic tremor at Mt.   St. Helens in April   and May   1980, Bull.  Seismol. Soc. Am., 76, 923-938,   1986.  Hurst,   A.   W.,   A   Volcanic Tremor Monitoring   System, J.  Volcanol.   Geotherm.   Res., 26, 181-187,   1985.  Jordan, D. W., and P. Smith, NonlinearOrdinaryDifferential  Equations,360 pp., Clarendon, Oxford, 1983.  Kamo, K., T. Furuzawa, and J. Akamatsu, Some natures of  volcanic micro-tremors at the Sakura-jima volcano, Bull.  Volcanol.   Soc. Jpn., 22, 41-58,   1977.  Koyanagi, R. Y., B. Chouet, and K. Aki, Origin of volcanic  tremor   in Hawaii   Part   I.   Data   from   the   Hawaiian   Volcano  Observatory 1969-1985, in Volcanism in Hawaii, edited by R. W. Decker, T. W. Wright, and P. H. Stauffer, U.S.  Geol. Surv. Prof. Pap., 1350, 1221-1259,   1987.  Kubotera, A., Volcanic   tremors at Aso volcano,in Dev. Solid  Earth Geophys., vol. 6, PhysicalVolcanology, edited by L. Civetta et al., 29-47, Elsevier, New York, 1974.  Kubotera, A., and M. Otsuka, Nature of non-volcanic micro-  tremor   observed on the Aso caldera, J. Phys. Earth, 18,  115-124,   1970.  Lahr, J. C., B. A.   Chouet, C. D.   Stephens, J. A. Power, and R. A. Page, Earthquake classification,location, and  error analysis in   a volcanic environment: Implications  for the magmatic system of the 1989-1990 eruptions at  Redoubt volcano, Alaska, J. Volcanol.   Geotherm.   Res., in press, 1994.  Latter,   J.   H.,   Volcanological observations at   Tongariro  National   Park,   2,   Types and classification of volcanic

# Page 19

JULIAN:   VOLCANIC   TREMOR--NONLINEAR   EXCITATION   BY   FLUID   FLOW   11,877  earthquakes, Geophys. Div. Rep., 150, 60 pp., Dep. of Sci.  and Ind. Res., Wellington, N. Z., 1979.  Latter,   J. H.,   Volcanic earthquakes and their relationship  to eruptions at Ruapehu and N   gauruhoe volcanoes, J.  Volcanol.   Geotherm.   Res., 9, 293-309,   1981.  Macdonald, G. A., and J.P.   Eaton, The eruption of Kilauea  volcano in May 1954, VolcanoLett., 1-9,   1954.  Macdonald, G. A.,   and J.P.   Eaton, The   1955 eruption of  Kilauea volcano, VolcanoLett., 1-10,   1955.  Manghnani,   M.   H.,   and   G.   P.   Woollard,   Elastic   wave  velocities in Hawaiian rocks at pressuresto ten kilobars,  in   The Crust and Upper Mantle of the Pacific Area, Geophys.  Monogr. Ser., vol. 12, edited by L. Knopoff, C. L. Drake,  and P. J. Hart,   pp. 501-516, AGU,   Washington, D.C.,  1968.  May,   R.   M.,   Simple   mathematical   models   with   very  complicated dynamics, Nature, 261, 459-467,   1976.  McClelland,   L.,   T.   Simkin, M.   Summers, E.   Nielsen, and  T. C. Stein (Eds.), GlobalVolcanism 1975-1985,655 pp.,  Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1989. McNutt,   S.   R.,   Observations   and   analysis   of   b-type  earthquakes,   explosions volcanic   tremor   at   Pavlof  volcano, Alaska,   Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am.,   76,   153-175,  1986.  McNutt,   S. R., Volcanic tremor at Pavlof volcano, Alaska,  October 1973-April 1986, Pure   Appl. Geophys., 125, 1051-  1077, 1987.  McNutt,   S. R., A bibliography of volcanic   tremor and related  phenomena, Calif. Div. Mines Geol. Open   File Rep., 89-1J,  1989.  Minakami,   T.,   Seismology of volcanoes in Japan, in   Der.  Solid Earth Geophys.,vol. 6,   Physical Volcanology,edited  by L. Civetta et al., pp. 1-27, Elsevier, New York, 1974.  Mori,   J., H. Patia,   C. McKee, I. Itikarai,   P. Lowenstein, P.  de Saint Ours, and B. Talai,   Seismicity associated with  eruptive activity at Langila volcano, Papua New Guinea,  J. Volcanol. Geotherm. Res., 38, 243-255,   1989.  Morse, P.M.,   and K.   U.   Ingard,   TheoreticalAcoustics,927  pp., McGraw-Hill,   New York, 1968. Murase,   T.,   and   A.   R.   McBirney,   Properties   of   some  common   igneous   rocks   and   their   melts   at   high  temperatures, Bull. Geol.   Soc.   Am., 8J, 3563-3592,   1973.  Omer, G.   C.,   Jr., Volcanic Tremor, Two: The   theory of  volcanic   tremor,   Bull.   Seismol. Soc. Am.,   40,   175-194,  1950.  Pedley, T. J., The Fluid Mechanics of LargeBloodVessels, 446 pp., Cambridge University Press, New York, 1980.  Pollard,   D.,   and   K.   Aki,   A   new   source mechanism for  volcanic tremor   (abstract),EosTrans. AGU, 62,400, 1981.  Pollard, D. D., P. T. Delaney, W. A. Dufiqeld,   E. T. Endo,  and A. T.   Okamura, Surface deformation in volcanic rift  zones, Tectonophysics, 9J, 541-584,   1983.  Press, W.   H., B. P. Flannery, S. A. Teukolsky, and W.   T. Vetterling,   Numerical   Recipesin C, 735 pp., Cambridge  University Press, New York,   1988.  Richter, D. H., J.P.   Eaton, K. J. Murata,   W. U. Ault,   and  H.   L. Krivoy,   Chronological narrative   of the   1959-1960  eruption of Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii, U.S. Geol.Surv. Prof.  Pap., 537-E, El-E73,   1970.  RSssler,O. E., An equation for continuouschaos,   Phys.   Lett.  A, 57, 397-398,   1976.  Saaty, T.   L., and J. Btam,   Nonlinear Mathematics,   381 pp.,  Dover, Mineola, N.Y.,   1981.  Sammis,   C.   G.,   and   B.   R.   Julian,   Fracture   instabilities  accompanying dike intrusion, J. Geophys.Res., 92, 2597-  2605,   1987.  Shima, M.,   On the second volcanic micro-tremor   at Volcano  Aso, Bull. Disaster Prey. Res. Inst. Kyoto Univ., 22, 1-6,  1958.  Shimozuru,   D.,   K.   Kamo,   and W.   T.   Kinoshita,   Volcanic  tremor of Kilauea volcano, Hawaii, during July-December  1963,   Bull.   Earthquake Res. Inst.   Univ. Tokyo, JJ,   1093-  1133, 1966.  St. Lawrence, W.,   and A. Qamar, Hydraulic transients: A  seismic source in   volcanoes and   glaciers, Science, 203,  654-656.,   1979.  Steinberg, G. S., and A. S. Steinberg, On possiblecausesof  volcanic tremor,   J. Geophys.Res., 80, 1600-1604,   1975.  Swanson, D. A., W.   A. Dufiqeld, D. B. Jackson, and D. W.  Peterson, Chronological narrative of the 1969-71 Mauna  Ulu eruption of Kilauea volcano, Hawaii,   U.S. Geol.   Surv.  Prof. Pap., 1056, 55 pp.,   1979.  Ukawa, M.,   and M.   Ohtake, A Monochromatic earthquake suggesting deep-seated magmatic activity   beneath the  Izu-Ooshima volcano, Japan, J. Geophys. Res., 92, 12,649-  12,663, 1987.  Walker, G. P. L., The dike complex of the Koolau volcano, Oahu:   Internal   structure   of   a   Hawaiian   rift   zone,   in Volcanism in Hawaii,   edited by R.   W.   Decker, T.   W.  Wright,   and P. H.   Stauffer,   U.S. Geol. Surv. Prof. Pap.,  1350, 961-993,   1987.  Walter,   S. R.,   Long-period earthquakes at Lassen Peak-  Evidence   for magma movement?(abstract), Eos Trans.  A GU, 67, 1264, 1986.  Walter, S. R., Long period earthquakes at southern Cascade  volcanic centers, Seismol.   Res. Lett., 59, 30, 1988.  Walter,   S. R.,   Ten years of earthquakes at   Lassen Peak, Mount   Shasta, and Medicine   Lake volcanoes, northern California: 1981-1990, Seismol.Res. Lett., 62, 25, 1991.  Welch,   P.   D.,   The   use   of   the   FFT   for   estimation   of  power   spectra:A method basedon averagingover short,  modified periodograms, IEEE   Trans. Audio Electroacous.,  A U-18,   70-73,   1967.  Wolfe, E. W., M. O. Garcia, D. B. Jackson,R. Y. Koyanagi,  C. A. Neal, and A. T. Okamura, The Puu Oo eruption of  Kilauea Volcano, episodes   1-20, January 3, 1983, to June  8, 1984, in Volcanism in Hawaii, edited by R. W. Decker,  T.   W.   Wright,   and P. H. Stauffer, U.S. Geol. Surv. Prof.  Pap., 1350, 471-508,   1987.  B.   R.   Julian,   U.S.   Geological Survey,  345   Middlefield   Road,   Menlo   Park,  (e-mail: julian@andreas. wr.usgs. gov )  Mail   Stop   977,  CA   94025-3591.  (ReceivedApril 14, 1993;   revisedOctober   21, 1993;  acceptedOctober   29, 1993.)

## Figure Captions (auto-extracted)

- **p.2 (Fig 1.)** Figure 1. Examples of tremor seismograms and their spectra from station GON at Sakura-jima volcano, Japan [after Kamo et al, 1977]. Abbreviations are V; vertical component; L; longitudinal component; and T'; transverse component.
- **p.2 (Fig 2.)** Figure 2. Examples of tremor seismograms and their spectra from Pavlof volcano, Alaska [after McNutt, 1986].
- **p.3 (Fig 3.)** Figure 3. Seismograms of an ordinary high-frequency 1981] or long-period events at depths of 30 km in Japan earthquake (above) and a “long-period event” (below) from |Ukawa and Ohtake, 1987], 16 to 22 km at Lassen Peak Mount St. Helens volcano, Washington [after Fehler and and Medicine Lake volcanoes in California | Walter, 1986;
- **p.3 (Fig 4.)** Figure 4. Seismograms of a long-period earthquake and About a, day later, eruptions began on the east rift zone. the sudden onset of a tremor episode at Mount St. Helens Short-period earthquake activity decreased and returned after Fehler, 1983]. The similarity of the initial portions of to approximately the background level during the first
- **p.3 (Fig 5.)** Figure 5. Seismograms of a “long-coda” earthquake, or “tornillo,” from Galeras volcano, Colombia. Small time marks are 10 s apart. Seismograms are reproduced courtesy of INGEOMINAS, Galeras Volcano Observatory, Pasto, Colombia.
- **p.4 (Fig 6.)** Figure 6. Chronology of seismic, tilt, and eruptive events associated with the September 13, 1977, east rift eruption of Kilauea (R. Koyanagi, personal communication, 1977). Solid areas on plot of eruption phases indicate strong fountaining; open areas indicate less vigorous spattering activity. Summit tilt was
- **p.7 (Fig 8.)** Figure 8. Lumped-parameter model of the generation direction (Figure 8). The channel thickness h can vary with of volcanic tremor. Viscous, incompressible fluid flows in time as the walls deform in the y direction in response z direction from upstream (bottom) to downstream (top) to changes in the fluid pressure, their behavior being
- **p.10 (Fig 10)** Figure 10 shows computed results for a case the same as that in Figure 9, except that p; has the lower value of 3 MPa Sh 0 1 0 5H (30bars). In this case, oscillations excited by the starting J L 4 7
- **p.11 (Fig 11.)** Figure 11. Conditions for occurrence of tremor, from equation (22). Each curve corresponds to a state of marginal instability (onset of tremor) for a fixed value of 3. The regions of instability (tremor) lie above the curves. The parameters r;, 72, and r3 are dimensionless numbers defined in equations (23).
- **p.12 (Fig 11)** Figure 11 can be used to determine where oscillations can including a classical cascade of period-doubling subharmonic occur most easily. In steady flow, the total fluid discharge bifurcations leading to chaotic oscillations. Figure 12 hsvs is the same everywhere along the channel, so vs; is illustrates this behavior, showing synthetic time series of
- **p.12 (Fig 12.)** Figure 12. Synthetic tremor time series (channel thickness h versus time) showing types of behavior that occur for different values of driving pressures p; when radiation damping of motion of channel walls is included in the model. Model parameters are as in Figures 9 and 10 except M = 0 and A = 107 kg
- **p.13 (Fig 13.)** Figure 13. Spectra of the synthetic tremor shown in Figure 12, computed for time series 200 s (10° samples) long, using Welch's [1967] method of averaging periodograms applied to 8192—sample windows. fundamental period doubles repeatedly to values of about 4, In Figure 14d, the orbits are restricted to a band, which
- **p.13 (Fig 14)** Figure 14 shows stereoscopic views of the orbits in phase illustrate that the attractor consists of an infinite number of space corresponding to the time series in Figure 12. The sheets. first three views (Figures 14a—14c) correspond to periodic One commonly used measure of the “shape” of an
- **p.14 (Fig 14.)** Figure 14. Stereoscopic views of orbits in phase space corresponding to the five time series in Figure 12. The h axis points out of the page and to the right, the v axis points into the page and to the right, and the h axis points upward. In the third view, the starting transient is omitted for clarity.
- **p.15 (Fig 14.)** Figure 14. (continued) from the plot to eliminate the initial transients. For low until at about 18.5 MPa the peak (and trough) values pressures, the flow is asymptotically steady, and h takes become densely distributed over a single band. Within this
- **p.16 (Fig 15.)** Figure 15. (a) Poincaré section showing intersections of a \ finite portion of the phase orbit of Figure 14e with the h—v 164.778 plane, on which h(t) = 0. (b) View of region enclosed in box
- **p.17 (Fig 16.)** Figure 16. Bifurcation diagram showing changes in by external disturbances when the flow cannot sustain qualitative behavior of tremor model as driving pressure continuous tremor. A lumped-parameter model of this p1 increases. Other parameters are as in Figures 12-15. tremor mechanism, ignoring resonance effects in the
- **p.17 (Fig 17.)** Figure 17. Return map for chaotic oscillations (Figure 12, reproduction of Figure 6. I am grateful for Eduard Berg's bottom). The ordinate gives the value of the nth peak, and detailed and constructive review, which led to substantial the abscissa gives the value of the (n—1)th peak. improvements in the paper.
