# Page 1

Organic Sonochemistry: A Chemist ’ s Timely Perspective on Mechanisms and Reactivity  R. Fernando Mart í nez, *   Giancarlo Cravotto, and Pedro Cintas *  Cite This:   J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856   Read Online  ACCESS   Metrics & More   Article Recommendations  ABSTRACT:   Sonochemistry, the use of sound waves, usually within the ultrasonic range (>20 kHz), to boost or alter chemical properties   and   reactivity   constitutes   a   long-standing   and sustainable technique that has, however, received less attention than other activation protocols despite a ff ordable setups. Even if unnecessary to underline the impact of ultrasound-based strategies in a broad range of chemical and biological applications, there is considerable misunderstanding and pitfalls regarding the inter- pretation of cavitational e ff ects and the actual role played by the acoustic   fi eld. In this Perspective, with an eye on mechanisms in particular, we discuss the potentiality of sonochemistry in synthetic organic chemistry through selected examples of past and recent developments. Such examples illustrate speci fi c controlling e ff ects and working rules. Looking back at the past while looking forward to advancing the   fi eld, some essentials of sonochemical activation will be distilled.  “ Alfred L. Loomis, Wall Street banker and scientist, with a beautifully equipped research laboratory at his Tuxedo Park   residence   where   he   cooperates   in   pure   science necromancy with his friend, Professor R. W. Woods, of Johns Hopkins University, made public yesterday details of a new form of sorcery, super-audible sounds. ”  The New York American (1927)   1  ■   INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION  Nearly one century after the seminal discovery by Loomis and associates   of   chemical,   physical,   and   physiological   e ff ects induced by ultrasonic frequencies, sonochemistry has become a   promising   and   cost-e ff ective   technique   to   reconsider sustainable chemical syntheses in line with the ever-increasing impact of environmental concerns. Sonochemistry has moved from a specialized   fi eld to inter- and multidisciplinary domains ranging from nanotechnology to drug delivery, among others. Although   the   use   of   ultrasonic   activation   has   long   been brought into the mainstream of organic synthesis, modern synthetic challenges such as selective functionalization, stereo- chemical control, or mechanistic interpretations still represent unsolved and/or open questions. Compared to other enabling techniques, namely photo- chemistry,   electrochemistry,   and   microwave   chemistry,   for which some variables are known and should be adjusted; sonochemistry is often viewed as a   black art , where it is less easy to predict what you are going to get. Ways of thinking with this technique lie invariably in cavitation ( vide infra ), which is complex enough to model or interpret all e ff ects in solution. This is reminiscent of the renaissance of sonochem- istry in organic synthesis in the early 1980s as narrated by one pioneer, Jean-Louis Luche, who attempted a di ffi cult Grignard reaction   in   a   cleaning   bath   when   all   else   failed.   The transformation   succeeded   and   led   to   new   avenues   and strategies in metal activation and improved one-pot Barbier- type reactions that bypassed tedious and hazardous organo- metallic reactions. 2   Readers are referred to recent books and reviews that address the multiple applications of ultrasonics and   sonochemistry   and   provide   su ffi cient   knowledge   for further   research.   3 − 7   Previous   textbook-like   monographs, suitable for beginners and practitioners alike, deal with key concepts   and   useful   tips   while   illustrating   the   broad applicability   of   ultrasonic   waves.   8   In   fact,   sonochemistry owes credit to some pioneers who paved the way to the current state of the art, both demystifying the technique and showing the fundamentals embedded in acoustics along with working rules. To name a few who in fl uenced our approach to organic sonochemistry, but by no means excluding others: Jean-Louis Luche, Ken Suslick, Tim Mason, Arnim Henglein, Peter Riesz, Takashi Ando, Oleg Abramov, and Jacques Reisse.  Special Issue:   Enabling Techniques for Organic Syn- thesis  Received:   April 7, 2021  Published:   June 22, 2021  Perspective pubs.acs.org/joc  © 2021 American Chemical Society   13833  https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856 Downloaded via 125.238.57.182 on September 17, 2025 at 04:15:21 (UTC). See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

# Page 2

Herein,   we   concentrate   on   sono-organic   methods   and general trends, which re fl ect well-established points and open up prospects for future explorations, especially in organic and medicinal chemistry. We begin with some introductory aspects of   cavitational   e ff ects,   followed   by   practical   remarks   on common ultrasonic reactors and how a series of external parameters, often overlooked or misunderstood, matter. The Perspective continues with some empirical rules, which show the opportunities and challenges for achieving creativity and selectivity under eco-friendly conditions. We   fi nally address future   orientations   and   innovations,   such   as   piezo-redox catalysts,   fl ow designs, and in-line automation.  ■   WHAT IS CAVITATIONAL CHEMISTRY?  Ultrasound   refers   to   inaudible   acoustic   waves,   which   are generally considered as being about 20 kHz, even though the audible upper limit of frequency in humans depend on age and other physiological conditions. Power ultrasound is devoted to high-intensity applications that produce permanent changes in the   physical   and   chemical   properties   of   materials.   Most sonochemical reactions are conducted at ultrasonic frequencies between 20 and 100 kHz with intensities high enough to cause cavitation in the liquid medium. This unique phenomenon provides the kinetic energy that fuels a transformation to completion and involves a juxtaposition of purely chemical (i.e.,   bond-breaking   and   bond-forming   reactions)   and mechanical (cleaning, dispersion, friction, interface instability, degassing, defoaming, and others) e ff ects. Within this context, ultrasound-induced chemistry can be appropriately de fi ned as  cavitational chemistry .   9,10   Cavitation refers to the generation of voids or microsized cavities when a liquid su ff ers a su ffi cient pressure drop that disrupts its cohesive forces. The subsequent and violent collapse to restore the intermolecular interactions releases a huge energy input accounting for the aforemen- tioned e ff ects. Although cavitation can be produced by various methods, there is little doubt that acoustic cavitation is the best known. The extreme conditions inside the microbubble with temperatures of several thousand Kelvin and more than 1000 atm were notably advanced by Lord Raleigh in the   fi rst hydrodynamic model as early as 1917.   11   Given the small size ( ∼ 1   μ m) and transient lifetime ( ∼ 1 ns) of bubbles, the physical nature of cavitation has been ascertained through light emission spectra (sonoluminescence) that occur during bubble collapse, which have even unveiled formation of plasma-like conditions in recent studies. 12 − 14 Surprisingly, the   fi rst chemical e ff ects observed by Loomis and his co-workers were ascribed vaguely to   “ frequency e ff ects ”  (they employed high-frequency transducers, unusual by that time). By 1929, however, the   fi rst description of ultrasonic oxidations suggested the putative role of hydroxyl radicals. 15 Richards reported the   fi rst comprehensive review of supersonic transformations, including sonochemical ones, in 1939 with 348 references.   16 A catching picture of cavitation and its e ff ects is shown in Figure 1. Volatile reagents and solvents will be trapped in the microbubbles, then undergoing homolytic cleavage and/or conversion   into   excited   states.   This   represents   a   primary sonochemistry that can be followed by secondary e ff ects, as such reactive species delivered into the liquid will react with molecules at the vicinity of the collapsing bubble or recombine to form stable products. Bubble collapse is accompanied by shock waves and shear forces that may cause further rupture of nonvolatile molecules accumulated at the bubble interface. In heterogeneous reactions involving solid − liquid and liquid −  liquid interfaces, such forces result in high-velocity   fl ows, acoustic streaming, which enhance both mass and energy transfers. Bubble implosion on surfaces generates microjets, hammering, and interparticle collisions,   17   all accounting for the well-established mechanical action and cleaning of acoustic cavitation.   8,18   In aqueous media and in the presence of oxygen, formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) will take place, with the OH radical being the most signi fi cant and nonspeci fi c oxidizing   agent.   Accordingly,   a   large   variety   of   organic molecules, especially pollutants, can be degraded by sonication alone or combined with other protocols.   19   Good correlations between octanol − water partition coe ffi cients and reaction rates have   been   observed,   as   hydrophobic   pollutants   tend   to accumulate   near   cavitation   bubbles.   20   The   cytotoxicity associated   with   some   ROS   can   also   be   harnessed   in sonodynamic therapies, involving the action of sonosensitizers under ultrasonic stimulation.   21 Remarkably, cavitation is a   geochemical phenomenon   that occurs   naturally   under   intense   hydrodynamic   conditions, turbulent streams, earthquakes, or waterfalls and wherever a shear force rapidly disrupts the continuity of aqueous surfaces. Collapsing waves in primeval oceans would have generated su ffi cient cavitation to induce chemical reactions and hence, formation   of   organic   compounds.   22   The   putative   role   of cavitation in prebiotic synthesis of life-based building blocks was suggested long time ago,   23,24   but its potentiality has scarcely been explored. A recent and detailed study from Grieser ’ s team reported that cavitation may be e ff ective in producing amino acid mixtures from carbon and nitrogen sources available in the early biosphere. 25   Ultrasonic irradiation (355 kHz, 70 W) of a mixture of nitrogen, methane, water, and acetic acid led to formation of a few amino acids (glycine, ethylglycine, and alanine) at rates in the range 1 − 100 nM/min (Scheme 1). It is believed that pyrolytic decomposition of substrates would occur within the imploding bubbles, a ff ording H • , HO • ,  • NH • , and NH 2 •   radicals, among others, with acetic acid being su ffi ciently   volatile   to   enter   an   expanding   bubble   and fragmented into carbonaceous radicals as well. Both radical −  radical   and   radical − molecule   reactions   should   be   equally probable   given   the   high   radical   concentration   within   the bubbles and yielding the end products in solution. This sort of cavitational   syntheses   provides   new   vistas   in   origin-of-life studies,   as   evidenced   recently   by   Zeiri   et   al.   from   a computational simulation of cavitational impacts (via shock wave modeling) on variable gaseous mixtures (CO, CO   2 , CH 4  Figure 1.   Representation of chemical and mechanical e ff ects induced by acoustic cavitation.  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13834

# Page 3

+ N 2 , NH   3 , or HCN) showing the generation of prebiotic monomers like glycolaldehyde, glyceraldehyde, urea, cyana- mide, formamide, isocyanic acids, and others. 26  ■   OPTIMIZATION AND MODES OF OPERATION. APFEL ’ S RULES  Although this Perspective is not intended to be a tutorial on ultrasonics, like in the case of raising techniques, electro- chemistry, for instance, 27   some background and guidelines are pertinent showing the simplicity of the technique through three common devices. The toolbox relies on the proper use of operational modes to ensure reproducibility, as gathered in  Scheme 1. Prebiotic-like Cavitational Synthesis of Amino Acids  Figure 2.   Some basic precepts and tips for proper use of ultrasonic devices. The image (from left to right) shows the usual setups (bath, probe, and cup horn) to conduct sonochemical reactions.  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13835

# Page 4

Figure 2.   6,28   Such setups usually work at a given frequency with wave amplitudes controlled by external voltage. Multifrequency reactors, even reaching the MHz zone, are more expensive and require a bit of expertise. Dosimetry methods to determine the actual acoustic power are strongly encouraged, 8   especially with ultrasonic baths. Numerous practitioners report essentially the nominal frequency (generally between 25 and 40 kHz) and output power indicated by the supplier, which are largely meaningless. Nor do reviewers, unfamiliarized with sonochem- istry, recognize the importance of determining a few working parameters.   Since   sound   radiation   is   devoid   of   quantum character, similar chemical e ff ects can be attained within a broad range of frequencies. Certainly, there are frequency e ff ects, but they should be assessed separately as a function of the acoustic intensity. The solvent is more than the reaction medium.   While   conventional   chemistry   pays   attention   to solvent ’ s properties like acidity or polarity, physical character- istics (volatility, viscosity, or surface tension) play key roles in sonochemical   activation   as   they   will   a ff ect   both   sound propagation and cavitational implosion. The design of devices enables various adjustments like pulsed on/o ff   irradiation, pressurized vessels, or bubbling gas. Even if the hot-spot temperature inside the microbubbles will determine the outcome of a sonochemical reaction (amount and nature of excited species), the macroscopic temperature has the same relevance as in silent reactions. Pulsed mode or thermostated   vessels   provide   accurate   thermal   control.   A  “ quick and dirty ”   solution, yet practical with cleaning baths, involves the deliberate addition of ice or cold water as the temperature rises after prolonged sonication. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, some sonophysicists, long engaged in cavitation, became rather perplexed when chemists reported sonochemical experiments, often using baths, without knowing the acoustic   fi eld to some detail.   29   As mentioned above,   this   criticism   is   also   pertinent   in   21st   century sonochemistry, although a full physical modeling of that   fi eld is not required and it is obviously beyond the scope of synthetic purposes. In context, however, one should recall a few precepts, postulated by Apfel some decades ago, 30   which are known as   Apfel ’ s golden rules   and expressed in a Socratic style:   “ know thy liquid ” ,   “ know thy sound   fi eld ” , and   “ know when   something   happens ” .   Apfel   reasoned   that   the   fi rst determines the cavitational threshold, the second the accuracy of measurements, and the third tells us that the e ff ects of cavitation indirectly inform about the magnitude of cavitation itself. In short, the rules warn about the measurement and signi fi cance of the acoustical parameters and, as a consequence, on the right use and calibration of ultrasonic devices. The de fi nition and use of physical parameters in the   fi eld of ultrasonics are rarely obvious to the chemist and can be the source of misinterpretations and overestimations. They are, however, of paramount importance for reproducibility and should remain constant for comparative analyses. Ultrasonic frequencies are divided into two broad groups: low-frequency/ high-power (from   ca . 18 kHz to 100 kHz) and high-frequency/ low-power (from 100 kHz to 10 MHz). The former is the usual area of sonochemistry where mechanical e ff ects are prevalent, while enhanced radical production and therefore chemical   e ff ects,   are   associated   with   the   high-frequency range. 28,31   The reactive species generated within the collapsing bubble   and   di ff using   into   the   surrounding   liquid,   follow di ff erent evolution as a function of the bubble lifetime and radius,   which   depend   among   others   on   the   frequency. Although global e ff ects vary with the acoustic frequency,   32   it makes   no   sense   to   worry   about   using   specific   frequencies . Moreover,   in   some   common   devices,   such   as   baths,   the resonance frequency is modi fi ed by other parameters like temperature, the level of liquid in the tank, and the transducer load owing to the reaction mixture. 8,28 Since   sound is   caused by pressure waves,   the acoustic intensity can be de fi ned as the power per surface unit and denoted as  ρ = I   P   c /2 A  2   (1) where   P A   is the acoustic pressure amplitude of the wave,   ρ   the density of the liquid, and   c   the speed of sound in that medium. This expression is valid only for planar or spherical waves generated within low-pressure variations. Cavitation at low- frequency ultrasound induces signi fi cant changes in acoustic pressures and complex, nonlineal behaviors are observed. 33   A relative   measurement   (and   usually   invoked   in   chemical studies) can be obtained from the amplitude of the emitter. However, a common mistake is to   associate the ultrasonic power effect with the vibrational amplitude   because the acoustic power transmitted depends on the emitting surface. Even worse, if the amplitude is maintained at the same level during a chemical reaction, any modi fi cation of the system (such as temperature, viscosity, concentration, etc.) will also modify the power. In other words, the amplitude must change if the power is to remain constant. That said, running a reaction at di ff erent vibration   amplitudes   enables   comparisons   of   synthetic e ffi ciency,   provided   that   other   parameters,   including   the shape and dimensions of the probe assembly, are speci fi ed. Probably the best way to characterize the energy delivered into the reactor is the notion of ultrasonic power, i.e., the transmitted acoustic power (in watts or milliwatts) or the power density (W/cm 2 ). This value can be inferred from physical or chemical measurements.   8,28,34   The easiest physical method implies the assimilation of the reaction vessel to a calorimeter, where the temperature is measured and plotted against time. Above the cavitation threshold, the acoustic energy is partially dissipated into heat. The calorimetric power (in watts) can be deduced from the following relationship with slope   Δ T / Δ t  =   ·   ·Δ   Δ P   w   m C   T   t (   )   / p   (2) where   m   is the mass of liquid irradiated with ultrasound and   C p the isobaric thermal capacity. It is obvious, by virtue of the nonlinear   behavior   of   cavitation   bubbles,   that   the   bulk temperature may not be spatially homogeneous and variations occur within the reaction vessel.   35   Accordingly, irradiation focused   on   small   volumes   is   desirable   in   the   search   for reproducibility. Chemical dosimetry involves the estimation of radical species by sonolysis, which can be quanti fi ed by UV −  vis or   fl uorescence measurements. 36   In aqueous media, OH radicals are created and monitored by di ff erent methods, the most   popular   being   the   Weissler   reaction,   based   on   the oxidation of an aqueous KI solution to I 2   ; addition of some halogenated solvents greatly enhances the oxidation rate. 8   In organic solvents, radicals other than OH •   can be generated, and the decomposition of reagents like DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-1- picryl-hydrazyl) has become a very sensitive probe of organic sonolysis. Spin-trapping of the radicals with monitoring by ESR is   an   accurate   method,   not   always   available   in   every laboratory.   37   More sophisticated and accurate protocols take  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13836

# Page 5

advantage of sonoluminescence spectra or chemiluminescence mapping obtained by oxidative degradation of luminol. 38,39 These methods provide a topology of the ultrasonic   fi eld, i.e., the spatial distribution of acoustic energy and location of maxima in cavitation.  ■   SONOCHEMICAL REACTIVITY: CONVERGENT AND DIVERGENT PATHWAYS  When we were introduced to the   fi eld of ultrasonics, our motivation   as   organic   chemists   was   to   understand   an apparently   new   model   of   chemical   reactivity,   other   than photochemistry and electrochemistry. Luche proved to be an e ffi cient mentor and wondered about the central point:   2,10  When and where does sonochemistry take place?  A general misconception dealing with ultrasonic activation is the often unproven assumption that a radical pathway is triggered   and   single-electron   transfer   (SET)   occurs,   as cavitational implosion causes solvent ’ s pyrolysis and homolytic ruptures. The reaction partners can be una ff ected and the whole reaction remains insensitive to sonication or exhibits a weak e ff ect. This consideration is behind the so-called Luche ’ s rules in an attempt to determine whether or not the rate- limiting   step   is   actually   the   sonication-sensitive   step   and, whether cavitation or new chemical intermediates dictate the reaction outcome. Luche himself cautioned about the general use of a classi fi cation based largely on empirical observations. There is a consensus on the   Second Class   reactions involving  heterogeneous ionic reactions , both solid − liquid and liquid −  liquid, where mechanical e ff ects derived from violent bubble collapse at the interfaces ( vide supra ) account for rate and yield enhancements. Moreover, polar and nonvolatile molecules can accumulate at the bubble-liquid interface, yet experiencing breakage   by   shock   waves.   As   we   shall   see   shortly,   the categorization is unclear in numerous cases and borderline situation emerge. When seeking a mechanistic rationale, a convenient   approach   is   the   elucidation   of   convergent   and  divergent   processes (Scheme 2). 10,40   This view on reactivity envisages the plausibility of competitive, simultaneous polar and radical pathways. When silent and ultrasonic reactions converge to the same product(s), only an overall acceleration usually results from sonication along with a di ff erent product distribution. If the two reaction pathways are divergent and a ff ord di ff erent products, sonication carries a true chemical component that leads to switching. It is worth pointing out that   both convergence and divergence under sonication do not necessarily imply a competitive radical route . This reminds us that the   fi rst sonochemical switching reported involved the change from an electrophilic aromatic substitution under stirring to a bimolecular nucleophilic substitution by sonication, as the more vigorous ultrasonic agitation alters the surface sites of the catalyst,   thereby   hampering   the   former   reaction.   This interpretation, now widely accepted, might not exclude the generation of radical species on a solid surface, provided the organic precursor is prone to undergo a SET pathway. A paradigmatic illustration of sonochemical convergence is a Wittig − Horner ole fi nation catalyzed by Ba(OH) 2   , for which there   is   compelling   evidence   of   a   radical   pathway   with sonication playing a 2-fold role.   41   The hydroxy groups on the catalyst surface serve as single-electron releasing sites which under   ultrasound   produce   the   radical   anion   of   the phosphonate ester. The other ultrasonic e ff ect is to cleave the trace amounts of water a ff ording OH •   radicals in su ffi cient concentration to sustain the catalytic cycle (Scheme 3). Homogeneous reactions in solution, illustrated by numerous addition and substitution reactions, appear to be the most problematic cases to understand. The hydrolysis of saccharose is a valuable example where the increase of reaction rate observed with irradiation is related to the cavitational event, as some formic acid, most likely generated by oxidation of the sugar with OH radicals, catalyzes this pH-dependent reaction. The   conjecture   could   be   con fi rmed   by   performing   a mechanically stirred reaction in the presence of HCOOH with quasi-identical results as for the sonolyzed reaction. 42 Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of esters or acetalization reactions exhibit, however, weak sonication e ff ects with only marginal increases   in   the   rate.   The   fact   that   irradiation   at   higher frequencies does not modify the rate with respect to the nonsonicated reactions points to the negligible e ff ect of radical production on such purely ionic mechanisms.   10   Conversely, heterogeneous   acetalization   of   unprotected   sugars,   which remain insoluble in the reaction mixture, are signi fi cantly accelerated by the sonication treatment.   43   Clearly, the polar mechanism is not a ff ected, but the enhanced mass transfer relative   to   conventional   stirring   leads   to   a   greater   yield. Notably, products are usually cleaner as acceleration avoids side reactions occurring in solution, and due to acid catalysis in a   simultaneous   way   as   the   heterogeneous   transformation proceeds.   Such   side   reactions,   being   homogeneous   polar processes, are not a ff ected by sonication either. Substrates with ambident reactivity or those leading to stabilized carbon- or heteroatom-centered radicals represent the realm of the third class of sonochemical reactions, which can   follow   either   SET   reactions   or   conventional   ionic/ concerted routes. The direct coupling of metals and organic partners usually requires harsh conditions or are virtually  Scheme 2. General Classi fi cation of Sonochemical Reactions Relative to Silent Conditions Depending on Product Distribution  Scheme 3. Convergent Sonochemical Wittig − Horner Reaction Catalyzed by Barium Hydroxide  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13837

# Page 6

negligible at room temperature, most likely owing to the heterogeneous nature of the system. Sonication in the presence of   electron   carriers   (like   benzophenone   or   4,4 ′ -di tert - butylphenyl   a ff ording   almost   instantaneous   production   of their colored radical anions) leads to dramatic reaction rates in   the   so-called   supersonic   preparation   of   versatile   metal reagents. 44   This result would not be expected on a mechanical e ff ect alone and lends instead support to a SET pathway triggered by ultrasound. Two noticeable examples are lithium diisopropylamide   (LDA)   and   samarium(II)   iodide,   widely employed in contemporary organic synthesis. 45,46   Scheme 4 depicts the expeditious sonochemical preparation of LDA that can be conducted in less than 30 min at room temperature and bypass the inert and dry conditions used conventionally.   47 Sonication   of   diisopropylamine,   lithium   powder,   and   an electron carrier (ideally isoprene as the only byproduct is volatile methylbutene), in THF or a THF − heptane mixture, a ff ords the desired LDA reagent. Electron transfer from the metal surface to the dialkylamine occurs almost immediately under sonication. The ease with which some metal reagents are obtained by sonication can further be coupled with elegant elaborations of natural product skeleta, like the families of avermectins and milbemycins, especially aided by transition-metal carbonyls. Thus,   π -allyl tricarbonyliron lactones (ferrilactones), which can be   isolated   as   stable   crystalline   solids   from   a   variety   of carbonyl, epoxide, or aryl sulfone reagents, lead to four-,   fi ve-, and six-membered lactones and lactams. Ultrasound enables their transformation into more sensitive substances such as glycosides, glycals, and medium-ring cyclic ethers that are unavoidable under thermal conditions.   44,48   As portrayed in Scheme 5, malyngolide (isolated from a 1:1 diastereomeric mixture by chromatography), a natural product present in blue algae and active against   mycobacteria   and   micrococcus , could be easily prepared from a vinyl epoxide through a sonochemical reaction   with   Fe   2   (CO)   9   in   benzene.   Sonication   releases Fe(CO) 5   or Fe(CO) 4   that can be trapped by alkenes and other double bonds. Such coordinatively unsaturated metal species play the equivalent role of radicals or carbenes in all- carbon   chemistry,   and   account   for   the   positive   e ff ect   in activating volatile metal carbonyls. It   is   somewhat   counterintuitive   that   violent   cavitation leading to turbulent hydrodynamic regimes achieves selective transformations, which would not occur under other conven- tional   conditions.   In   the   synthesis   of   (+)-milbemycin- β 1, structurally   related   to   avermectins   and   isolated   from  Streptomyces   bacteria, and employed for veterinary use, a key alkylation   step   was   only   successful   with   ultrasound   and compatible with a sensitive array of functional groups (Scheme 6). Likewise, the synthesis of naturally occurring bioactive compounds   bene fi tted   from   the   pluses   of   sonication,   as exempli fi ed in the synthesis of a key intermediate en route to tetronasin, an ionophore antibiotic (Scheme 7). 44   The use of NaSePh in the second step, sonochemically generated by cleavage of PheSeSePh with sodium in THF, proved to be instrumental. In the presence of benzophenone as ET reagent, sonication speeds up the reaction from 72 h (without the ketone) to 0.1 h. These   transformations   take   place   under   heterogeneous conditions   and   can   reasonably   be   categorized   within   the Type-III class of sonochemical reactions capable of following either polar or radical mechanisms. Selectivity could then be ascribed to reactions occurring prevalently at the solid − liquid interface, rather than in solution, with adsorption − desorption promoted by cavitation. The argument is reinforced by other cases where both regio- and stereoselectivity are enhanced using low acoustic powers. Conversely, poor selection takes place as the ultrasonic intensity increases, thereby removing faster adsorbed species or transient intermediates that would evolve in the bulk liquid. 49   The point is further witnessed by a recent and salient Pd-catalyzed   meta -selective C − H function- alization of arenes tethered with a controlling distal group.   50 Using a cleaning bath at room temperature without special power control, alkylation, ole fi nation, acetylation or cyanation proceeded selectively at   meta -position and without a trace of disubstituted   meta -isomers observed under thermal reactions at higher temperature and longer reaction times (Scheme 8). Some reactions did not occur in the absence of sonication. The rationale should be involving a conventional metal-catalyzed arene substitution, although the assistance of acoustical force cuts   the   energy   barrier   and   enhances   a   direct   meta- functionalization. In retrospect, the main application of ultrasonically activated zerovalent metals is linked to one-step Barbier-type reactions, usually a ff ording convergent results relative to silent reactions and employing more sustainable conditions such as aqueous media. 51   SET mechanisms are plausible for electropositive metals and those having low ionization potential energy as surfaces become rapidly depassivated from hard and unreactive coatings. Cheap and less hazardous metals, rather than ionic compounds,   have   also   been   harnessed   for   orthogonal  Scheme 4. Preparation of LDA by Activation of Lithium with Ultrasound and Isoprene as Electron-Transfer Reagent  Scheme 5. Short Synthesis of Malyngolide Involving the Sonochemical Formation of a Stable Ferrilactone  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13838

# Page 7

protocols, like the azide − alkyne cycloaddition. Thus, we were able to develop an improved click reaction using metallic copper that overcomes other limitations such as the in situ generation of Cu(I) species and the removal of copper salt byproducts. 52   The Cu(0)-based protocol can be applied to simple and elaborated substrates (like cyclodextrins) and gives rise to products in higher yields and shorter times than the nonirradiated reactions. This also avoids the use of additional ligands to stabilize Cu(I). Polar solvents are required, which allow for   higher cavitational energy coupled with heating (Scheme 9).  Divergent sonochemistry , by which irradiation switches the reaction   outcome   to   products   unavailable   under   silent conditions, is widely documented, although surely the most prominent results have been reported in recent years in the context of   ultrasound as mechanical force .   53 − 56   Most examples involve polymer chains in solution irradiated by low-frequency probes in high-intensity   fi elds for which mechanical e ff ects and acoustic streaming are prevalent over chemical production of reactive species.   57,58   As discussed above, the heterogeneous sonochemistry of small molecules will always be in fl uenced by mechanical energy transfer as the turbulent implosion leads to friction   and   deformation   at   boundary   surfaces.   59   This tribochemical consideration mirrors the mechanical interpre- tation of ultrasonic agitation in liquids as an elongational   fl ow  fi eld, where the strain rate depends on the time passed since the onset of cavitational collapse, the radius of the imploding bubble, and on the distance to the bubble. 60   In homogeneous and/or   dilute   systems,   however,   the   tensile   forces   lack directionality and molecular control is much more di ffi cult to achieve than in standard mechanochemistry involving solid −  solid and solid − liquid contacts. 61   A way to convey mechanical activation to small molecules relies on the use of covalently linked polymer chains that, playing the role of large tweezers, concentrate and propagate the mechanical input on labile functional groups. Such entities now called   mechanophores   are embedded in or near the middle of polymer chains, thereby undergoing   speci fi c   cleavage,   whereas   that   mechanical activation fails if chains are not attached to both ends of the mechanophore. A salient result that challenges the validity of Woodward − Ho ff mann   rules   for   pericyclic   reactions   was described by Moore and associates on the sonication of a benzocyclobutene   mechanophore   in   the   middle   of   poly- ethylene glycol side chains (PEG) (Scheme 10). 62   Both   cis - and   trans -derivatives experience ring opening a ff ording an ( E,E )-con fi gured diene, whose presence could be corroborated by spectroscopic identi fi cation using a chromophore-contain- ing molecule. Under thermal activation only the   trans -isomer is expected to give the ( E,Z )-diene. It is obvious that mechanical scission caused by strain after bubble collapse is most likely responsible for polymer cleavage. Ultrasound   does   seemingly   induce   conrotatory   opening   in  trans -benzocyclobutene   and   disrotatory   motion   in   the   cis - isomer. In principle, the conversion between ( E,Z ) and ( E,E ) products   could   involve   a   biradical   transition   structure; however, radical production appears to have a negligible e ff ect in the present case. Accordingly, the intuitive conclusion is that  Scheme 6. Semisynthetic Route to Enantiopure Milbemycin- β 1 a  a The   fi rst step fails without sonication.  Scheme 7. Key Intermediate ’ s Synthesis toward Tetronasin  Scheme 8. Direct and Selective Meta-C − H Substitution of Arenes Mediated by Ultrasound  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13839

# Page 8

thermally forbidden mechanisms may become   mechanochemi- cally   allowed   pathways   within   a   certain   range   of   forces . Theoretical simulations indicate that mechanical force can bias a given reaction toward a nonconventional fragmentation easier to achieve. 63,64   Sonicated polymer solutions can mimic the   response   of   macromolecules   to   mechanical   loads   in compressed   solid   polymers,   although   thermodynamically controlled mechanochemical reactions are di ffi cult to assess in   solution,   as the equilibrium   is re-established   once   the polymer escapes the elongational   fl ow.   61   Thermodynamically forbidden reactions, such as   cis -to- trans   isomerization of rigid bonds, can reach a lower transition barrier under mechanical strain that can be rationalized in terms of force distribution along a   fl exible polymer backbone.   65,66 Although mechanisms and conditions for both polymer fragmentation and polymer formation in acoustic   fi elds are well established and receive increasing attention, 67   it is fair to say that the mechanophore concept grew up from the scission of a diazo bond stabilized by adjacent cyano groups and within two poly(ethylene glycol) chains.   68   The divergent results under thermal and ultrasonic rupture are shown in Scheme 11. Mechanical activation conducted with a high-intensity 20 kHz probe at mild temperature (6 − 9   ° C) led in less than 60 min to selective formation of a cyano alcohol derivative, arising likely from oxidation of radical intermediates, which should also be generated by thermal fragmentation of the starting polymer.   Thermal   activation,   however,   required   a   higher temperature (82   ° C) for 24 h and gave rise to products resulting from hydrogen abstraction and dimerization. The distinctive hydroxyalkylation under sonication evidence the role played by species produced after cavitational implosion, which   are   inaccessible   by   thermal   degradation.   This   had already been observed by Nakamura et al. in a series of studies on sonochemical initiation of radical chain reactions where hydroxy groups are added to C − C double bonds.   69 Numerous   mechanophores   and   metallo-mechanophores undergo expeditious scission or transformation in the middle of   polymer   chains   subjected   to   pulling   forces   caused   by cavitation.   70   An   interesting   and   recent   addition   is   the  Scheme 9. Alkyne − Azide 1,3-Dipolar Cycloadditions Activated by Sonication Using Metallic Copper  Scheme 10. Forbidden Ring-Opening Reaction of Benzocyclobutene Mechanophores Induced by Ultrasonic Activation  Scheme 11. Divergent Sonochemical and Thermal Scission of Azobisnitriles within Long Polymer Chains  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13840

# Page 9

mechanochemical unzipping of polyladderenes, for which force causes   an extensive rearrangement   of the structure converting the   nonconjugated   and,   hence,   insulating,   polyladderene structure into a conjugated polyacetylene with semiconducting properties. 71,72   Due to the strained arrangement of fused four- membered rings, ladderenes undergo facile ring fragmentation. A terminal cyclobutene ring of the chloro-substituted [5]- ladderane monomer breaks through ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) with a Grubbs ruthenium carbene catalyst. Further dehydrohalogenation a ff ords homopolymers loaded with ladderene mechanophores along the skeleton. Sonication of the soluble mixture under argon causes extensive formation   of   a   polyacetylene,   which   self-aggregates   after prolonged irradiation resulting in an insoluble blue-colored polymer (Scheme 12). Application to bio-/physiological processes along with drug release represent extensions of sonolytically activated mecha- nophores. It is noteworthy a paradoxical example where mild  sonication stabilizes through stretching, compounds that would be unstable   in   the   absence   of   force ,   as   reported   recently   for maleimide − thiol adducts. 73   Such derivatives are employed in bioconjugation, although they are susceptible to retro-Michael reaction and, as a result, thiol exchange   in vivo   that diminishes the therapeutic e ff ect of bioconjugates. Pulsed sonication in aqueous bu ff er at pH 7.4 of a polyethylene glycol (PEG) −  maleimide reagent modi fi ed with trastuzumab, a clinically used antibody, accelerates adduct hydrolysis, thereby stabilizing the resulting conjugates and cutting signi fi cantly the competing retro-Michael reaction (Scheme 13). In addition, sonication does not change the binding of the antibody to its target ligand.   In   fact,   antibody − PEG   conjugates   prepared   under ultrasonic irradiation showed ligand-binding activity similar to those of silent conditions in an enzyme-based assay. Likewise, mechanical scission of disul fi des bearing cargo molecules within the center of a water-soluble polymer enables the liberation of anticancer molecules, such as camptothecin and   gemcitabine,   accompanied   by   fl uorescent   reporters. 74 Sonication (20 kHz probe, 15.84 W/cm 2 ) causes the reductive cleavage of the disul fi de bond, and the resulting thiols are then involved in a subsequent 5- exo-trig   cyclization that liberates the drug   molecules   (Scheme   14).   As   expected,   terminally functionalized polymers failed to release the small molecules, thus con fi rming the stretching force of long chains on the centered mechanophore. Similar strategies have been tailored to   drugs   linked   to   polymers   by   covalent   or   noncovalent interactions. Thus, the aminoglycoside antibiotics neomycin B and paromomycin are released from RNA aptamers, as the carrier, by ultrasound-induced cleavage of both noncovalent interactions and labile covalent bonds with the phosphodiester RNA moiety. H-bonding interactions between a peptide and the antibiotic vancomycin (yet bound to a polymer or gold nanoparticle)   can   easily   be   disrupted   by   sonication.   75 Complementary methods against infectious diseases combine both antibiotics, not necessarily linked to carriers, and the sonobactericide e ff ect of bubble cavitation that fragments the cell wall and degrades other biomolecules required for bacterial function.   76   Furthermore, cell membrane permeabilization, a process described as   sonoporation , can be induced by stable cavitation at higher frequencies and enhances intracellular delivery of some drugs in tumor cells.   77 At this stage, most convergent sonochemical reactions have traditionally been gathered within the classi fi cation of   false sonochemistry , bene fi ting from mechanical action and enhanced mass transfer. However, they can be divergent in nature, as the nonirradiated   reaction   does   not   occur   at   all   or   requires conditions   that   can   be   circumvented   by   sonication.   An interesting   example   is   the   ultrasonic   treatment   of   silanes opening the path to new silicon structures. Due to the inverse polarization of the Si − H bond, small silicon hydrides are more reactive and energetic than the corresponding alkanes, and ignite in air spontaneously. Heating of silanes leads to pyrolytic disproportionation and oligomerization reactions producing long-chain silanes, but elevated temperatures ( ∼ 400   ° C) and inert atmospheres are necessary. An alternative ultrasonic ring- opening   polymerization   of   cyclopentasilane   (Si   5   H   10   )   for instance,   causes   ultrafast decomposition   leading   to   silicon nanoparticles that can further be polymerized with ultrasound or   UV light   to Si-based   materials for electronic or   solar applications.   78   The initiation of polymerization, assumed to be homolytic pyrolysis, is sonocatalytic in nature and not thermic, owing to the low macroscopic temperature of the solution (between 20 and 75   ° C). Heterogeneous and aqueous biphasic reactions, for which ultrasound   often   gives   rise   to   remarkable   improvements without altering the conventional mechanism, have become appealing in the context of a green chemistry agenda.   5,6,79 Enabling   technologies   make   it   possible   reactions   hitherto unknown   having   pluses   in   terms   of   higher   yields   and  Scheme 12. Formation of Polyladderene-Polyacetylene Copolymers under the Mechanical Action of Ultrasound  Scheme 13. Mechanochemical Stabilization and Hydrolytic Acceleration of Maleimide − Thiol Adducts during Sonication  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13841

# Page 10

selectivities in shorter times. A critical appraisal based on green metrics   should   be   advocated   nevertheless.   80,81   Enabling techniques, namely ultrasound, microwaves, electrochemistry or mechanochemistry,   are not green on their own . It is ironic to claim benign syntheses under such   “ green conditions ”   while ignoring the amount of volatile solvents needed for product isolation and puri fi cation, as well as the fate of waste generated. That said, ultrasound exerts a bene fi cial homogenizing e ff ect that enables water and water − organic cosolvent mixtures to be used, along with   “ in-water ”   and   “ on-water ”   reactions that depend strongly on interfacial contact. 82   Early work by Ando and co-workers showed that ultrasound alone may replace the role of water and heterogeneous solid − solid and solid − liquid reactions are more favored than those run in homogeneous solution. As example, a strong oxidant like KMnO   4   oxidizes alkenes smoothly in aqueous solution depending on the pH of the solution, but attacks double bonds very slowly in apolar solvents. The latter is much more e ffi cient under sonication, presumably by destroying or altering the crystal lattice of the solid   salt.   83   Kinetic   studies   conducted   under   ultrasonic irradiation provided further evidence on hydrophobic inter- actions, which are responsible for the acceleration of some reactions in aqueous media. Sonication caused retardation of polar reactions in water, whereas rates were restored and enhanced in water − ethanol mixtures, likely associated with rapid   micromixing   of   the   reaction   partners.   84   As   a consequence, sonication may replace the assistance of phase- transfer   catalysis   and   facilitate   the   coupling   of   insoluble substrates in aqueous media. Representative developments that illustrate the e ffi cient sonomixing of biphasic solutions are portrayed by ole fi n metathesis in aqueous emulsions or on- water   reactions.   A   sonochemical   ring-closing   metathesis (RCM) at room temperature, without surfactants or organic cosolvents, takes place inside the water-insoluble droplets of the diene, leading to carbocycles in almost quantitative yields (Scheme 15). 85   The ring-forming process occurs under neat conditions as well, although accompanied by side products resulting from diene oligomerization. The latter was prevented under the micellar conditions attained with sonication. A   one-pot   synthesis   of   the   antitumoral   indole   alkaloid cephalandole A involves the catalyst-free condensation of 2- aminophenol with an indolyl carboxylic acid derivative in water under   ultrasonic   agitation.   This   application   discloses   a convenient atom-economical protocol for the construction of 2-oxo-benzo[1,4]oxazines in aqueous media that combines ultrasound and heating. 86   A related transformation, using a chiral diamino ligand as catalyst, ( S,S )-diphenylethylenedi- amine, a ff ords the anticoagulant drug warfarin in optically pure form   87   and   could   be   accomplished   in   sonicated   aqueous solution (Scheme 16).  Scheme 14. Mechanical and Reductive Cleavage of Disul fi de-Centered Polymers Aimed at Drug Release by Ultrasonication  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13842

# Page 11

The use of surfactants can increase the solubility of organic substrates and have a positive e ff ect on inertial cavitation, in part due to the enhanced growth rate of the bubbles. 88   A cationic surfactant, cetyltrimethylammonium hydroxide, has been   used   to   increase   the   solubility   of   isatin   and   aryl/ heteroaryl ketones, whose condensation gives rise to quinolines in 75 − 95% yield at room temperature under sonication (22 kHz, 40% amplitude). Irradiation increases the reaction rate (by   ca . 3-fold) and avoids strong bases like NaOH or KOH employed in the silent reaction. It is pertinent to note, in terms of energy savings (energy supplied in kJ per mass of product), that sonication saved more than 78% energy with respect to the nonirradiated procedure. 89   A similar e ff ect to that of surfactants on solvent ’ s surface tension can be obtained by  hydrotropes   in aqueous solution. The term hydrotrope denotes a nonmicelle forming substance, i.e., compounds that do not have a critical concentration above which self-aggregation takes place,   while   increasing   the   solubility   of   hydrophobic compounds. Aqueous hydrotropic solutions merge both low vapor pressure and increased viscosity, relative to pure water, thus causing stronger cavitational collapse during compres- sional cycles and therefore faster reactions. A hydrotropic solution containing sodium   p -toluensulfonate at a concen- tration (50% w/v) that allows the maximum solubilization of acetophenones, aniline, and aryl aldehydes facilitates the three- component   coupling   when   sonication   is   applied   (Scheme 17).   90  ■   CAVITATIONAL EFFECTS CAN BE USED TO RESOLVE MECHANISTIC PATHWAYS  The late Nobelist George Olah once said that   “ mechanisms cannot   be   proven,   only   disproven ” .   By   determining   the in fl uence   of   acoustical   parameters   on   rates   and   reaction products, a sonochemical study can inform on the actual e ff ects of cavitation. As witnessed in the preceding results, ultrasonic activation is of enormous value in chemical processing, but investigation in sonochemical mechanisms is rather unusual. Seeing as a reaction does not occur under silent conditions, cavitation points to e ff ects other than thermal activation. In a high   atom-economy   construction   of   fused   heterocycles, pyrano[3,4- e ][1,3]oxazines,   extruding 2   equiv   of   methanol only (Scheme 18), reagents were mixed on KF/alumina as catalyst and sonicated (37 kHz), giving rise to the product after 45 min at 70 − 80   ° C.   91   No reaction occurred using the same catalyst at the same temperature in the absence of irradiation, even after 12 h. Given the low volatility of substrates, they will not undergo pyrolytic cleavage in the bubble and cavitation just provides su ffi cient kinetic energy to surmount the reaction barrier. At such a frequency and low power, the kinetic e ff ect might stem primarily from acoustic streaming. However, the thermal e ff ect alone has little e ff ect on the catalyst ’ s activation. The   key   role   of   cavitation   should   instead   be   related   to shockwaves and microjets that cause local deformation at the solid surface and increase the possible reaction sites. Nearly two decades ago, we coped with the interpretation of a sonochemical cycloaddition, which are still among the most challenging cases to disentangle. Both moderate accelerations and greater yields have been reported for a few [4 + 2] and [3 + 2] cycloadditions, the most successful involving quinones as dienophiles as well as the use of azadienes. 92   The redox properties of such partners might then lead to an electron  Scheme 15. Ring-Closing Alkene Metathesis Using Acoustic Emulsi fi cation  Scheme 16. Sonochemical Syntheses of Heterocyclic Drugs in Aqueous Media  Scheme 17. Synthesis of   β -Amino Carbonyl Compounds by Three-Component Reaction in Hydrotropic Solution Irradiated with Ultrasound  Scheme 18. Mismatched Cavitational and Thermal E ff ects on the Kinetic Activation of a Solid Catalyst  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13843

# Page 12

transfer   instigated   by   ultrasound   giving   a   radical   cation generated   by   the   diene   or   its   dienophile.   This   situation resembles the mechanism of radical cycloadditions and related pericyclic reactions developed by Bauld and associates, though initiated by aminium radical cations.   93 The addition of furan (as 2 π   component) to masked   o - benzoquinones,   generated   in   situ   by   oxidation   of   the corresponding phenol with (diacetoxyiodo)benzene (DAIB), was accelerated by sonication, though neither the regiochem- istry   nor   diastereoselection   were   a ff ected   (Scheme   19). 94 Yields were dependent on acoustic energy, temperature, and solvent composition. A radical initiator (aminium salt) had no appreciable e ff ect on the yield relative to the silent process, nor did oxygen/argon atmospheres alter the extent of cycloadduct formation.   The   combined   e ff ect   of   acoustic   power   and temperature is noticeable (Figure 3). Working with a 30 kHz probe between   − 20 and +20   ° C at three di ff erent energy levels (3.6,   10.8,   and   17.4   W/cm 2 ),   all   above   the   cavitational threshold, the yields were the lowest at the highest power and remained practically constant as temperature varied. At 10.8 W/cm 2 , the yields improved slightly, whereas higher yields were attained at the lowest acoustic power (3.6 W/cm 2 ) with a signi fi cant variation with temperature (up to 70% at   − 10   ° C). The paradoxical anti-Arrhenius e ff ect of sonochemical reaction was evident as cavitational collapse enhanced by lowering the temperature and hence the solvent ’ s volatility. The increase in viscosity   as   temperature   decreased   halted   the   cavitational activation and the cycloaddition slowed down at   − 20   ° C. All such results are inconsistent with a concerted process while supporting a stepwise double Michael addition as shown in Scheme 19. The formal cycloaddition could also be accelerated under Lewis acid catalysis and sonication at   − 10   ° C. Given the homogeneous working conditions, the question is whether there is any sonochemical e ff ect not related to a mechanistic switching. UV − vis monitoring in the presence and absence of furan revealed that sonication greatly increases the dispersion of the parent quinone, thus inducing an e ffi cient mixing in the system without mechanical stirring. The sonochemical batch reactor behaves, at least for small volumes, like a   fl owlike reactor where convective currents avoid local supersaturation and accounts for the observed improvements. Epoxidation and oxidations not involving radical pathways appear to be candidates to elucidate the e ff ect of sonication as changes   in frequency and intensity   will produce di ff erent amounts   of   oxidizing   free   radicals.   The   use   of   aqueous hydrogen peroxide for epoxidation of hydrophobic alkenes needs   the   assistance   of   cosolvents   and   phase-transfer surfactants.   95   A   fi ne example of mechanistic switching, yet giving the same product, takes place by combining ultrasound and a hydrophobic ionic liquid, instead of acetonitrile under silent conditions, as reported for the epoxidation of alkenes with H   2 O   2 /NaHCO 3   and a manganese − porphyrin catalyst. 96 The   bleaching   of   the   catalyst   in   CH   3   CN   favored   an epoxidation   route   where   peroxycarbonate   (NaHCO 4   )   was the   actual   oxidant.   In   contrast,   the   ionic   liquid   (methyl- octylpyrrolidinium-NTf   2 ) protected the catalyst from degrada- tion and ultrasonic irradiation (20-kHz probe,   P elect   = 11.5 W, 0.79 W/mL) kinetically induced the formation of high-valent oxo-Mn-porphyrin as oxidant. The ultrasonic e ff ect could be unambiguously demonstrated by using a chiral bis-binaphthyl Mn-porphyrin   as   catalyst.   Enantioenriched   epoxides   were obtained in the ionic liquid as solvent, while a racemate formed in CH   3 CN without sonication owing to decomposition of the metalloporphyrin. The same team conducted epoxidation of   cis -cyclooctene at much higher frequency (800 kHz) using H   2 O   2   and H   2 WO 4   as catalyst.   97   Tungstate   salts   are   in   fact   appropriate   and sustainable catalysts in the sonochemical processing of biomass derivatives.   98   At high frequency, the increasing production of OH radicals coming from either water or H   2   O 2   sonolysis would favor a more e ffi cient and faster path not accessible without irradiation. Under conventional conditions and due to the strong exothermicity of epoxidation, there is a sharp increase of temperature (from 25 to 95   ° C in 5 min) that renders the process uncontrolled. To check the in fl uence of sonochemical   parameters,   high-frequency   irradiation   was applied at low acoustic power to ensure a steady 60   ° C temperature, giving rise to a retarded reaction with respect to silent conditions. Surprisingly, little H   2 O 2   (less than 2%) is decomposed by ultrasound as inferred from measurements with a chemical dosimeter, and higher loadings of tungstic acid do not catalyze hydrogen peroxide decomposition either. These results suggest that OH •   radicals formed by sonolysis do not undergo side reactions that decompose progressively H   2   O 2 . Rather, the sonochemical conditions favor the milder formation   of   stable   peroxotungstate   species.   The   use   of biphasic conditions with an onium salt as PT catalyst was explored, but no e ff ect from radical production could be determined. The pluses of sonication are related to an e ffi cient mixing, in line with the above-discussed cycloaddition, and enhanced   phase   transfer   to   bring   active   peroxotungstate  Scheme 19. Addition of Furan to Masked   o -Quinones Proceeding through a Probable Stepwise Mechanism  Figure 3.   Cycloadduct yield as function of temperature at three acoustic   powers for   the reaction of   methyl   vanillate   and   furan. Reproduced with permission from ref 94a. Copyright 2003 Elsevier B.V.  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13844

# Page 13

species   from   aqueous   to   organic   phase   to   epoxidize   cis - cyclooctene (Scheme 20). While the silent reaction produces higher conversion and yield after 15 min, almost complete selectivity toward epoxide formation is provided by sonication between 15 and 45 min. This result is linked to the accurate control of temperature (between 60 and 80   ° C), which also allows a low loading of H 2   WO 4   as catalyst compared with the nonirradiated reaction. 97 A   more   direct   participation   of   water   sonolysis   at   high frequency that alters product selectivity is evidenced by glucose oxidation catalyzed by cupric oxide at 550 kHz. 99   While ultrasound   alone   and   Cu(II)   catalysts   can   independently oxidize   glucose   to   gluconic   acid,   water   sonolysis   at   high frequency under argon leads to H •   and OH •   radicals, the former being trapped by the oxygenated lattice of the catalyst. This leaves concomitantly a broader coverage of OH •   radicals on   the   CuO   surface   that   selectively   oxidizes   glucose   to glucuronic acid (Scheme 21). Moreover, cavitation bubbles are much smaller at high frequency than at the usual 20 kHz, thus preventing the mechanical damage of shock waves on the catalyst after implosion. Gluconic acid is formed as byproduct in low yield (<10%), probably due to di ff usion of radicals into the bulk liquid. The use of a radical scavenger inhibited the formation of glucuronic acid, thus illustrating the synergistic e ff ect of OH •   radicals and the solid catalyst.  ■   PIEZOELECTRICITY AND PIEZO-REDOX CHEMISTRY  Ultrasonic energy is transmitted by power transducers, which have the ability to convert high-frequency electrical   fi elds into mechanical vibration. This takes advantage of the   piezoelectric effect   in certain crystals, by which a mechanical force applied to an ionic crystal produces an electric polarization, and therefore a measurable voltage. This is the   direct   piezoelectric e ff ect. The  inverse   piezoelectric e ff ect occurs when a voltage applied to the material leads to mechanical strain (Figure 4). Piezoelectricity has the origin in the lack of a center of symmetry in the crystal structure and the anisotropic e ff ect can only be observed in some directions of natural and arti fi cial crystals. 100   Along with piezoelectric transducers, magnetostrictive materials have been employed   as   well,   where   a   magnetic   fi eld   converts   into mechanical motion. However, the development of piezoelectric ceramics with improved mechanical properties make these materials   suitable   for   most   power   ultrasonic   systems. Furthermore, piezoelectric crystals can also be ferroelectric with   a   hysteresis   loop,   a   nonlinear   relationship   between polarization   and   the   applied   electric   fi eld.   101   Common piezoelectric materials include oxides like BaTiO   3 , PbTiO 3 and LiNbO 3   together with more complex compositions, albeit in   all   cases   they   show   perovskite-type   structures.   It   is noteworthy that piezoelectricity can be substantially improved by metal doping, which may   fi nd further applicability in sonar and ultrasonic imaging. 102 Piezoelectric materials, in the form of massive solids or particles,   have   shown   to   catalyze   redox   reactions   under mechanical force, like those produced by shear conditions of low-frequency ultrasound as well as strong mechano-vibration. It   is believed   that charges   occur in the catalyst,   thereby generating a strain-induced voltage that can be coupled with electron transfer with substrates. Such   mechanoredox   catalysts can be viewed as analogous to photoredox catalysts, which hold signi fi cant promises for synthetic explorations. In order to understand how piezoelectricity can mediate a redox trans- formation, some physical considerations are needed, the basis being that aligned dipoles exist within the solid. A compressive force will decrease the dipole separation, thus leading to a net charge on the faces of the material and hence a voltage. Conversely, a tensile force will produce an opposite voltage. As a result, a piezoelectric material combines both mechanical and electric properties. 103   For an elastic solid, the relation between stress ( σ ) and strain ( ε ) is given by Hooke ’ s law in the form  σ   ε =   E   (3) where   E   is Young ’ s modulus. For the remaining discussion, however, and given the potential confusion between   E   for Young ’ s modulus and the standard nomenclature for electric  fi eld strength (with identical symbol), Hooke ’ s law should now be expressed as  Scheme 20. Catalytic Cycle Induced by High-Frequency Ultrasound in the H   2   O   2 -Mediated Biphasic Epoxidation of Cyclooctene  Scheme 21. Selective Sonocatalytic Oxidation of   D -Glucose to   D -Glucuronic Acid under High-Frequency Ultrasound  Figure 4.   Schematic representation of direct (left) and inverse (right) piezoelectric e ff ects.  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13845

# Page 14

σ   ε =   c E   (4) where   c E   is the elastic Young ’ s modulus and the superscript (E) denotes the electrical conditions under which the modulus is measured, in this case, a constant electric   fi eld. On the other hand, the behavior of a capacitor can simply be described by  β = E   D   (5) with   E   being the electric   fi eld,   D   the electric displacement and  β   the dielectric coe ffi cient. In a piezoelectric material   σ   and   E  are coupled in the way that application of force not only induces mechanical stress, but also produces electric charge. In mathematical   form,   the   following   equations   dictate   the behavior through a   piezoelectric constant   ( h ) that links the mechanical and electrical responses:  σ   ε =   + c   hD D   (6)  ε   β = −   + E   h   D   (7) the only variation being that the   c D   modulus replaces the above  c E   to indicate measurement under constant charge conditions. Ultrasonic   agitation   of   a   piezoelectric   material   can   be su ffi cient to generate the electrochemical potential required for water   splitting. 104   Thus,   hydrothermally   synthesized   ZnO micro fi bers   (also   exhibiting   piezoelectric   properties)   and BaTiO 3   microdendrites were vibrated with ultrasound, thereby developing   a   strain-induced   charge   on   their   surfaces   and causing the liberation of H   2   and O   2   from water (Figure 5). This   phenomenon   is   conceptually   di ff erent   from   other sonochemical   and   mechanocatalytic   processes   where   the reagent undergoes a redox reaction to split water. 105,106   The piezoelectric catalyst is involved in donating strain-induced electrons and holes without decomposition or redox change. Irradiation   with   an   ultrasonic   transducer   (which   actually harnesses the inverse piezoelectric e ff ect) leads to the rapid production of H   2   and O   2 , with gas generation ceasing when ultrasound is turned o ff . This kind of miniature devices for low- cost water splitting can be advantageous over other electro- chemical and photochemical procedures, although optimum performance   depends   on   both   lengths   and   resonance frequency of the piezoelectric material. Longer   fi bers may undergo a greater bending and hence an increase in strain- induced voltage. Piezoelectric (nano)particles can be literally employed as  chemical transducers   for reduction of organic molecules or metallic precatalysts required for coupling reactions or radical polymerizations.   107   Scheme 22 depicts the radical polymer- ization of   n -butyl acrylate using a suspension of BaTiO   3   NPs sonicated   in   the   presence   of   n -butyl   acrylate,   ethyl   α - bromoisobutyrate   as   initiator,   and   equimolar   amounts   of Cu(OTf)   2 , Me 6   TREN, i.e.,   N,N,N ′ ,N ′ ,N ″ ,N ″ -hexamethyl[tris- (aminomethyl)amine], and Bu 4 NBr as the catalyst precur- sor.   108   The   piezoelectric   material   reduces   the   Cu(II)  Figure 5.   (Top) Micrometer-sized BaTiO 3   or ZnO experience acoustic vibrations that cause water splitting via piezoelectric e ff ect. (Bottom) (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of BaTiO 3   dendrites grown on a glass substrate; (c) SEM and (d) TEM images of ZnO   fi bers grown on a Si(100) wafer. (e) Morphologies of a single ZnO   fi ber (upper image) and BaTiO   3   dendrite (lower image). Reproduced from ref 104. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13846

# Page 15

precatalyst to its active Cu(I) form that activates the alkyl halide.   Ultrasound   not   only   produces   alkyl   radicals   by homolytic cleavage but also su ffi cient mechanical input to control polymer growth. Combination   of   BaTiO   3 -mediated   step-growth   polymer- ization   and   Cu-catalyzed   azide − alkyne   click   cycloaddition using the above-mentioned Cu(II)-precatalyst gave rise to a linear polytriazole. 109   Further application of this protocol to a polyurethane − trialkyne mixture a ff orded a polymer, which could be cross-linked mechanochemically. The resulting gel solidi fi ed after prolonged ultrasonic irradiation (Scheme 23). Mechanical activation other than ultrasound in the presence of piezoelectric crystals can trigger a similar mechano-redox reaction. Above a critical agitation threshold, highly polarized particles will be formed serving as strong reductants to transfer electrons to small molecules, followed by oxidative quenching of a donor molecule, thus leading to bond formation. This has been shown by Kubota and co-workers using ball milling to agitate BaTiO 3   that reduces aryl diazonium salts, which are then applied to arylation and borylation reactions (Scheme 24).   110   It is worth pointing out that ball milling generally provides su ffi cient stress to activate the piezoelectric material, while grinding or other mechanical methods a ff ord poor or no results, as revealed by solvent-free C − H tri fl uoromethylation of   N -heterocycles and short peptides developed by the same group. Moreover, the optimum performance hinges on the number and size of the balls and longer reaction times. 111 Piezoactivation of biomolecules, like enzymes, can inspire major developments, although it is well-known that ultrasound a ff ects enzyme activity and may cause extensive degradation after long irradiation times.   112   In a recent study, Yoon et al. were   able   to   implement   a   peroxygenase   catalyzed   oxy- functionalization that exploits the piezocatalytic generation of H   2   O 2   via oxygen reduction on bismuth oxychloride (BiOCl) under ultrasound (40 kHz, 70 W).   113   Bismuth-based ceramics have gained popularity for transducer applications as improved lead-free ferroelectrics, 114   even though bismuth salts remain underestimated   as   piezoelectric   reagents   115   compared   to titanate compounds.   116   An illustration of the oxyfunctionaliza- tion reaction is shown in Figure 6, where ultrasonic activation of BiOCl in aqueous bu ff er solution containing a recombinant unspeci fi c   peroxygenase   from   Agrocybe   aegerite   (300   nM) accelerated   the selective hydroxylation of ethylbenzene to enantiopure (>99% ee) ( R )-1-phenylethanol. The mechanism  Scheme 22. Sonication-Induced Mechano-Radical Polymerization with Piezoelectric BaTiO   3   . Bottom: Mechanistic Simpli fi cation of the Sonochemical Activation  Scheme 23. Click Azide − Alkyne Polymerization Using Cu(I) Species Generated by Ultrasonic Reduction of Cu(II) Precatalyst with BaTiO   3   Particles a  a Photo   (bottom)   reproduced   with   permission   from   ref   109. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.  Scheme 24. Mechanoredox Arylation Mediated by a SET Pathway with Piezoelectric Material  Figure   6.   Sonication-induced   catalytic   C − H   oxyfunctionalization using piezoelectric BiOCl microsheets plus an unspeci fi c peroxyge- nase. Reproduced from ref 113. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13847

# Page 16

should involve the reaction of electrons from the piezoelectric material with O   2   and H   2 O leading to superoxide (O 2 • − ) and OH •   radical intermediates. The authors hypothesized that such radical species may inactivate peroxygenase, thus hampering its catalytic activity. To minimize the oxidative stress of short- lived OH •   radicals, the enzyme was spatially separated from BiOCl and placed in a dialysis membrane bag, which allowed the   di ff usion   of   H   2 O   2   and   products   without   altering   the catalytic e ff ect.  ■   FLOW AND AUTOMATION: THE PRESENT AND FUTURE  Chemistry from this century on should be dominated by the juxtaposition of automation and machine-learning algorithms, which will lead to (almost) complete robotization of synthetic and   operational   steps.   117,118   The   increasing   adoption   of continuous   fl ow systems over batch reactors, still with timid implementation by the industry, has much to do with more e ffi cient processes in terms of costs and risks, and in agreement with a more sustainable chemistry. While industrial applications of acoustic and hydrodynamic cavitation require scale-up considerations (reactor design for instance), 119,120   which are not covered here, ultrasound and  fl ow systems are ideal partners as one moves downward, i.e.,  miniaturization , because acoustic micro fl uidics constitutes an emerging   technology   enabling   cell   and   particle   manipula- tion.   121   Moreover,   bubble-based   robotics   and   on-a-chip systems   should   help   to   develop   novel   acoustic   micro/ nanomotors   and   sensors.   122   For   the   purpose   of   this Perspective, we are concerned with acousto fl ow synthesis at the meso- and microscale levels. Unlike batch conditions,   fl ow and   micro fl ow   devices   exhibit   enhanced   heat   and   mass transfers along with improved reaction kinetics, due to the small path occupied by reagents in channels of microscopic diameters, and enable the preparation of organic compounds, especially active pharmaceutical ingredients. 123   In addition, the reduced dimensions allow the facile penetration of external energy souces, namely ultrasound, microwaves, or light. 124   The rapid   formation   and   consumption   of   intermediates   and products, generated in small amounts, entail the safe handling of hazardous substances. Overall, such bene fi ts are not only linked to greater e ffi ciency, but also to lower environmental impact. The point is well illustrated by a continuous nitration of   phloroglucinol   leading   to   a   potentially   explosive   poly- nitrophenol as shown in Figure 7.   125   The nitration reaction requires an oxidizing and toxic mixture of sulfuric acid and ammonium   nitrate,   whose   manipulation   jeopardizes   the protocol, even in dilute conditions. Mixtures of mono- and trinitrophloroglucinols are usually obtained, although the latter could be generated in 98% yield (determined by HPLC) at 40  ° C using a thermostated ultrasonic bath, which homogenized the reaction mixture as well. The most serious drawback of a micro fl uidic reactor is associated   with   clogging   of   small   channels   caused   by heterogeneous mixtures and/or concomitant precipitation of products, which can be avoided by cavitational agitation. 126 The best way to overcome that limitation is to immerse the  Figure 7.   Continuous   fl ow nitration of phloroglucinol assisted by sonication. Reproduced from ref 125. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.  Figure 8.   Capillary sonoreactor for phase-transfer catalysis. Reproduced with permission from ref 127. Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V.  Figure 9.   Sonochemical Barton decarboxylation of carboxylic acids under continuous   fl ow. The protocol was optimized for hexanoic acid and   N -phenylmaleimide   using   dicyclohexylcarbodiimide   (DCC). Reproduced with permission from ref 128. Copyright 2016 the Royal Society of Chemistry.  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13848

# Page 17

microchannel device in an ultrasonic bath as depicted in Figure 8. The system in question was employed for the phase-transfer reaction of benzyl chloride and sodium sul fi de catalyzed by an ammonium salt. 127 An optimized Barton decarboxylation has been achieved under ultrasonic continuous   fl ow, which enabled large-scale synthesis. 128   The reductive decarboxylation of hexanoic acid was selected as a case study, using CH   2 Cl 2 − MeOH as solvent system pumped by HPLC. The mixture was entered into a tubular reactor (Te fl on coil, 0.8 mm internal diameter and 40- m length) heated in an ultrasonic bath below 35   ° C (Figure 9). Both power (10 to 100%, 300 W) and frequency (37 to 80 kHz) were regulated, while in order to ensure a liquid mixture the pressure was set to 0.1 MPa by a back-pressure valve (BPR). Being a radical mechanism, the Barton decarboxylation took   advantage   of   both   mechanical   and   chemical   e ff ects provided   by   cavitation,   by   bringing   energy   for   radical production (H •   and OH • ) and removing oxygen from the solution. The transformation proceeds with formation of CO 2 and dicyclohexyl urea as byproducts. Multistep continuous synthesis will require external input to quicken the   fl ow of heterogeneous mixtures through a narrow tubing. An impressive example is shown in Figure 10 detailing the synthesis of a biologically active intermediate from a tricyclic ketone. The complete operational protocol could be executed   by   a   single   researcher,   who   also   controlled   the machined setup with a low-cost computed-assisted webcam. 129 The telescoped eight-step route comprises in addition three transformations   involving   fi ve   intermediate   downstream processing steps. Sonication was applied to enhance mass transfer   in   two   critical   points   (steps   1   and   2),   thereby increasing overall e ffi ciency. A   di ff erent   design   for   handling   solid-forming   reactions involves a multilayered piezoelectric actuator (50 kHz, 300 W)  Figure 10.   Telescoped eight-step continuous   fl ow synthesis a ff ording a polycyclic intermediate of biological importance. Reproduced from ref 129b. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13849

# Page 18

integrated with a Te fl on microreactor. The equipment was employed in expeditious and high-yielding (typically >95%) Pd-catalyzed C − N cross-couplings between aryl chlorides and anilines. 130   Gas bubbles induced by stable cavitation followed by collapse contribute to break and dissolve solid particles (Figure 11). Chemical syntheses on a drop scale have been performed using a piezoelectric chip irradiated by surface acoustic waves (SAWs). The miniaturized device consists of a piezoelectric substrate (LiNbO   3 ) with two interdigital transducers at each end in the form of 250 nm thick Ti − Al electrodes and then connected to a power source (Figure 12). 131   By applying an electric   fi eld to the piezoelectric material, SAWs are generated as periodic distortions with an amplitude of a few nm and wavelengths of several   μ m propagating across the surface with the velocity of sound in the solid. 132   The distance between the electrodes determines the SAW frequency, which may vary from less than 1 MHz to a few GHz. Results collected in Figure 12 were obtained at 20 MHz, usually under net conditions or using   a   nonvolatile   solvent   like   diethylene   glycol,   and proceeded   at   far   shorter   reaction   times   than   reported conventionally with other energy sources. Clearly, the working frequencies and acoustic conditions deviate from those of standard power ultrasonics. Cavitation e ff ects   should   be   discarded,   as   greater   intensities   would otherwise be required to induce cavitation beyond the MHz threshold. The observed enhancements are largely thermal, and in fact, irradiation with such standing acoustic waves, even for short periods, causes a signi fi cant increase in temperature of the drop (tens of degrees). While SAWs have become a promising   tool   in   chemical   sensing   and   nanoparticle manipulation, 133   from   a   mechanistic   standpoint   such   soft waves can be an alternative to other droplet generation and aerosol-based methods employing heat or ionization activa- tions. Furthermore, SAWs can inform on catalytic reactions on surfaces.   Thus,   up   to   6-fold   rate   enhancement   has   been reported for the catalytic oxidation of CO over platinum   fi lms using   SAWs   under   high   vacuum.   134   Although   various hypotheses have been suggested, both photoelectron micros- copy and dynamic simulations support the thermal activation  Figure 11.   Multilayered Te fl on-made microsonoreactor that enables rapid dissolution of solid particles by ultrasonic irradiation as shown by microscopic images. Reproduced with permission from ref 130. Copyright 2011 the Royal Society of Chemistry.  Figure 12.   Piezoelectric device employed for some drop reactions ( ∼ 40   μ L) shown below, irradiated by surface acoustic waves (SAWs) generated by an external oscillating electric   fi eld on the piezoelectric material   (LiNbO3).   Reproduced   with   permission   from   ref   131. Copyright 2009 the Royal Society of Chemistry.  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13850

# Page 19

resulting from energy dissipation along with reversible surface deformation. 135   The latter can enhance catalytic rates via sorption − desorption process induced by the acoustic oscil- lations.  ■   CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK  “ Oye hijo mi ́ o, oye el silencio, Es un silencio onduloso ”  [ “ Hear my son, hear the silence, It is a wavy silence ” ]  Federico Garci ́   a Lorca (1931)   136 One could conclude that sonochemistry, dealing with the chemical use of sound in a broad range of frequency and power, has gained a pole position among enabling techniques with an eye on more sustainable protocols. In some ways, however, the discipline cannot be regarded as mature. We should ask questions like, why one or the other product are obtained, whether we can understand how activation happens, and if the use of ultrasound is really justi fi ed, rather than claiming   another   synthetic   variation.   While   ultrasonic activation is rooted in well-established principles of cavitational phenomena, the   fi rst action to be taken, which agrees with the rules suggested by Apfel, is   know the equipment you need and how it works . Reproducible experiments can be run paying attention to a few parameters without worrying about others. In our Perspective, we have given a glimpse on   known facts . One can anticipate that some reactions and substrates will be sensitive to sonication in either physical or chemical terms. Whether   or   not   ultrasound   switches   the   conventionally assumed mechanism often needs further evidence, where the sonochemical experiment itself can be as informative as other elucidation   methods.   Attempts   to   classify   sonochemical reactions can result in ill-conceived conclusions if structural and solvent e ff ects that usually accompany cavitation are not investigated in detail. A reductionist approach that merely considers either convergent or divergent results with respect to conventional chemistry may be the key to identifying the tools that are required to understand how the reaction takes place. Whatever the mechanism can be, a di ff erent result under sonication is not synonymous with a radical/electron transfer pathway   as   often   and   erroneously   invoked;   two   polar mechanisms   can   compete   each   other.   Perhaps   the   most divergent   results   arise   from   the   conceptual   framework   of  sono-mechanochemistry   as another manifestation of mechanical e ff ects, especially in polymer chains, induced by turbulent solvent   fl ows at the microscale. The issue is complex, although inertial motion in an acoustic   fi eld may a ff ect both bonding and energy barriers. As far as we know, cavitation does not involve an electric   fi eld component (as once postulated) and our present-day interpretation relies largely upon the   hot spot  theory.   Piezoelectric   materials,   the   source   of   ultrasonic transducers,   are   susceptible   to   electric   polarization   under strain. This peripheral e ff ect can advantageously be exploited in new   mechano-redox   processes   that   provide   salient   and unexpected results. A translation of cavitational   fl ow into a continuous   operation   has   enabled   further   innovation   in micro fl uidics and acoustophoretic devices, which should be part   of   the   future   of   chemistry.   Despite   bottlenecks   and insu ffi cient knowledge of cavitational e ff ects, the impact of ultrasound-based chemistry is steadily increasing in multiple synthetic and nonsynthetic applications.  ■   AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Authors  R. Fernando Mart í nez   −   Department of Organic and Inorganic Chemistry, Faculty of Sciences, and IACYS-Green Chemistry and Sustainable Development Unit, University of Extremadura, 06006 Badajoz, Spain;   orcid.org/0000- 0002-3278-6074; Email: rmarvaz@unex.es  Pedro Cintas   −   Department of Organic and Inorganic Chemistry, Faculty of Sciences, and IACYS-Green Chemistry and Sustainable Development Unit, University of Extremadura, 06006 Badajoz, Spain;   orcid.org/0000- 0002-2608-3604; Email: pecintas@unex.es  Author  Giancarlo Cravotto   −   Dipartimento di Scienza e Tecnologia del Farmaco, Universita degli Studi di Torino, Torino 10125, Italy;   orcid.org/0000-0001-7574-7350 Complete contact information is available at: https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  Notes  The authors declare no competing   fi nancial interest.  Biographies  R.   Fernando   Mart ı ́ nez   studied   Chemistry   at   the   University   of Extremadura, where he received his B.Sc. in 2006. In 2010, he received   his Ph.D.   at   the University   of   Extremadura under   the supervision of Prof. Juan C. Palacios. In 2011, he moved to Oxford, where he worked as a postdoctoral researcher in the groups of Prof. George W. J. Fleet and Prof. Angela J. Russell (University of Oxford). In 2015, he joined the group led by Prof. Mar ı ́ a Luz Lo ́   pez Rodr ı ́ guez at the Complutense University of Madrid. Since 2017, he has been working as Associate Professor at the University of Extremadura.  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13851

# Page 20

Pedro Cintas received his Ph.D. in organic chemistry from the University of Extremadura and carried out postdoctoral studies with Wolfgang Oppolzer in Geneva (Switzerland). He has been fortunate enough to teach organic chemistry since the early 1990s, learning regularly more chemistry from both students and coworkers. He is a member of the European Society of Sonochemistry, the American Chemical Society, and the Board of   Ultrasonics Sonochemistry .  Giancarlo Cravotto became a researcher at the University of Turin after spending four years in the chemical and pharmaceutical industry and one year at the Technische Universita ̈   t in Berlin (Prof. P. Weyerstahl). He is currently Full Professor of Organic Chemistry with research   activity   in   the   domain   of   green   organic   synthesis   and processing documented by about 450 scienti fi c, peer-reviewed papers and 20 patents. He was Director of the Department of Drug Science and Technology (University of Turin) from 2007 to 2018, serving currently as vice-Director. He collaborates with a variety of industrial partners. He was awarded the   Organic Chemistry for the Environment, Energy and Nanosciences   prize (2018) and Gold medal   “ E. Paterno ̀ ”  (2020) auspiced by the Italian Chemical Society.  ■   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  We express our heartfelt thanks to the many collaborators who have helped develop all our past and current projects on applied sonochemistry and related hybrid techniques. Con- tinued support from the Junta de Extremadura and Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (as witnessed by recent grants IB16167, IB16022, and GR18015) is warmly   appreciated. Additional funding from the European Union through the EU H2020 MSCA-ETN COSMIC framework for research and training is highly acknowledged as well.  ■   DEDICATION  This article is dedicated to Jean-Louis Luche (1941 − 2014) and his family (wife and daughters). Jean-Louis contributed signi fi cantly to the current status of synthetic sonochemistry and guided the   fi eld with generosity and humility, supporting and inspiring students and friends.  ■   REFERENCES  (1) Conant, J.   Tuxedo Park. A Wall Street Tycoon and the Secret Palace of Science that Changed the Course of World War II ; Simon & Schuster: New York, 2002; pp 50 − 51. (2)   Luche edited in the late 1990s a multiauthor monograph with a focus on organic sonochemistry and sonosynthesis: Synthetic Organic Sonochemistry ; Plenum Press: New York, 1998. (3)   Handbook   on   Applications   of   Ultrasound.   Sonochemistry   for Sustainability ; Chen, D., Sharma, S. K., Mudhoo, A., Eds.; CRC Press, Inc.: Boca Raton, FL, 2011. (4)   Power   Ultrasonics .   Applications   of   High-Intensity   Ultrasound ; Gallego-Juárez, J. A., Gra ff , K. F., Eds.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, 2015. (5)   (a)   Chatel,   G.   Sonochemistry.   New   Opportunities   for   Green Chemistry ; World Scienti fi c Publishing: Singapore, 2017. (b) Chatel, G., Colmenares, J. C.   Sonochemistry: from Basic Principles to Innovative Applications. Topics in Current Chemistry ; Springer: Berlin, 2017. (6) Léve ̂ que, J.-M.; Cravotto, G.; Delattre, F.; Cintas, P.   Organic Sonochemistry.   Challenges   and   Perspectives   for   the   21st-Century ; Springer Nature: Cham, Switzerland, 2018. (7) (a) For selected reviews and chapters, mostly oriented to organic chemistry/synthesis: Shingare, M. S.; Shingate, B. B. Ultrasound in synthetic   applications   and   organic   chemistry.   In   Handbook   on Applications of Ultrasound. Sonochemistry for Sustainability ; Chen, D., Sharma, S. K., Mudhoo, A., Eds.; CRC Press, Inc.: Boca Raton, FL, 2011;   pp   213 − 261.   (b)   Banerjee,   B.   Recent   developments   on ultrasound assisted catalyst-free organic synthesis.   Ultrason. Sonochem.  2017 ,   35 , 1 − 14. (c) Banerjee, B. Recent developments on ultrasound- assisted one-pot multicomponent synthesis of biologically relevant heterocycles.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2017 ,   35 , 15 − 35. (d) Lupacchini, M.; Mascitti, A.; Giachi, G.; Tonucci, L.; d ’ Alessandro, N.; Martinez, J.; Colacino, E. Sonochemistry in non-conventional, green solvents or solvent-free reactions.   Tetrahedron   2017 ,   73 , 609 − 653. (e) Penteado, F.; Monti, B.; Sancineto, L.; Perin, G.; Jacob, R. G.; Santi, C.; Lenarda ̃   o,   E.   J.   Ultrasound-assisted   multicomponent   reactions, organometallic and organochalcogen chemistry.   Asian J. Org. Chem.  2018 ,   7 ,   2368 − 2385.   (f)   Draye,   M.;   Chatel,   G.;   Duwald,   R. Ultrasound for drug synthesis: A green approach.   Pharmaceuticals  2020 ,   13 , 23. (8) (a) Mason, T. J.; Lorimer, J. P.   Applied Sonochemistry. Uses of Power Ultrasound in Chemistry and Processing ; Wiley-VCH: New York, 2002. (b) Mason, T. J.; Peter, D.   Practical Sonochemistry. Power Ultrasound Uses and Applications , 2nd Ed.; Woodhead Publishing Ltd.: Cambridge, UK, 2002. (9) Cravotto, G.; Cintas, P. Power ultrasound in organic synthesis: moving cavitational chemistry from academia to innovative and large- scale applications.   Chem. Soc. Rev.   2006 ,   35 , 180 − 196. (10) (a) Luche, J.-L. Sonochemistry. From experiment to theoretical considerations. In   Advances in Sonochemistry ; Mason, T. J., Ed.; JAI Press, Ltd.: London, 1993; Vol.   3 , pp 85 − 124. (b) Luche ’ s distinction between   true and false sonochemistry , the former denoting reaction outcomes that arise from cavitation-generated species and the latter stemming largely from enhanced mass transfer in heterogeneous processes, has proven to be useful for classi fi cation, although there are numerous borderline situations that hamper generalization. (11) (a) For historical perspectives on sonochemistry and cavitation: Bremner, D. Historical introduction to sonochemistry. In   Advances in Sonochemistry ; Mason, T. J., Ed.; JAI Press, Ltd.: London, 1990; Vol.  1 ,   pp   1 − 37.   (b)   Cravotto,   G.;   Cintas,   P.   Introduction   to sonochemistry: A historical and conceptual overview. In   Handbook on Applications of Ultrasound. Sonochemistry for Sustainability ; Chen, D., Sharma, S. K., Mudhoo, A., Eds.; CRC Press, Inc.: Boca Raton, FL, 2011; pp 23 − 40. (12) (a) McNamara, W. B., III; Didenko, Y. T.; Suslick, K. S. Sonoluminescence   temperatures   during   multi-bubble   cavitation.  Nature   1999 ,   401 , 772 − 775. (b) Didenko, Y. T.; Suslick, K. S. The energy efficiency of formation of photons, radicals and ions during single-bubble cavitation.   Nature   2002 ,   418 , 394 − 397. (c) Suslick, K. S.; Flannigan, D. J. Inside a collapsing bubble: sonoluminescence and the conditions during cavitation.   Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem.   2008 ,   59 , 659 − 683. (13) Flannigan, D. J.; Suslick, K. S. Inertially confined plasma in an imploding bubble.   Nat. Phys.   2010 ,   6 , 598 − 601. (14) For brief remarks on acoustic cavitation, see: Suslick, K. S.; Eddingsaas, N. C.; Flannigan, D. J.; Hopkins, S. D.; Xu, H. The chemical history of a bubble.   Acc. Chem. Res.   2018 ,   51 , 2169 − 2178. (15) Schmitt, F. O.; Johnson, C. H.; Olson, A. R. Oxidations promoted by ultrasonic radiation.   J. Am. Chem. Soc.   1929 ,   51 , 370 −  375.  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13852

# Page 21

(16) Richards, W. T. Supersonic phenomena.   Rev. Mod. Phys.   1939 ,  11 , 36 − 64. (17) (a) Xu, H.; Zeiger, B. W.; Suslick, K. S. Sonochemical synthesis of nanomaterials.   Chem. Soc. Rev.   2013 ,   42 , 2555 − 2567. (b) Pokhrel, N.; Vabbina, P. K.; Pala, N. Sonochemistry: science and engineering.  Ultrason. Sonochem.   2016 ,   29 , 104 − 128. (18) Verhaagen, B.; Fernandez Rivas, D. Measuring cavitation and its cleaning effect.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2016 ,   29 , 619 − 628. (19) (a) Cao, H.; Zhang, W.; Wang, C.; Liang, Y. Sonochemical degradation of poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances-A review.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2020 ,   69 , 105245. (b) Wu, Z.; Abramova, A.; Nikonov, R.; Cravotto, G. Sonozonation (sonication/ozonation) for the degrada- tion of organic contaminants-A review.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2020 ,   68 , 105195. (20) Serna-Galvis, E. A.; Montoya-Rodríguez, D.; Isaza-Pineda, L.; Iban ̃ ez, M.; Hernández, F.; Moncayo-Lasso, A.; Torres-Palma, R. A. Sonochemical degradation of antibiotics from representative classes. Considerations on structural effects, initial transformation products, antimicrobial activity and matrix.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2019 ,   50 , 157 −  165. (21) (a) Son, S.; Kim, J. H.; Wang, X.; Zhang, C.; Yoon, S. A.; Shin, J.;   Sharma,   A.;   Lee,   M.   H.;   Cheng,   L.;   Wu,   J.;   Kim,   J.   S. Multifunctional   sonosensitizers   in   sonodynamic   cancer   therapy.  Chem. Soc. Rev.   2020 ,   49 , 3244 − 3261. (b) Lin, X.; Song, J.; Chen, X.; Yang, H. Ultrasound-activated sensitizers and applications.   Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.   2020 ,   59 , 14212 − 14233. (22) Ben-Amots, N.; Anbar, M. Sonochemistry on primordial earth- its potential role in prebiotic molecular evolution.   Ultrason. Sonochem.  2007 ,   14 , 672 − 675. (23) (a) Sokol ’ skaya, A.; El ’ piner, I. Chemical synthesis under the action of supersonic waves in a water saturated with gases of a reducing atmosphere.   Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR   1958 ,   119 , 1180 − 1182. (b) Sokolskaya, A. Glycine and alanine synthesis from formaldehyde and hydroxylamine in the field of ultrasound waves.   Origins Life   1976 ,  7 , 183 − 185. (24) (a) Anbar, M. Cavitation during impact of liquid water on water. Geochemical implications.   Science   1968 ,   161 , 1343 − 1344. (b) Negrón-Mendoza, A.; Albarrán, G. Chemical effect of ionizing radiation and sonic energy in the context of chemical evolution. In  Chemical Evolution: Origin of Life ; Ponnamperuma, C., Chela-Flores, J., Eds.; A. Deepak Publishing: Hampton, VA, 1993; pp 235 − 247. (25) Dharmarathne, L.; Grieser, F. Formation of amino acids on the sonolysis of aqueous solutions containing acetic acid, methane, or carbon dioxide, in the presence of nitrogen gas.   J. Phys. Chem. A   2016 ,  120 , 191 − 199. (26)   Kalson,   N.-H.;   Furman,   D.;   Zeiri,   Y.   Cavitation-induced synthesis of biogenic molecules on primordial earth.   ACS Cent. Sci.  2017 ,   3 , 1041 − 1049. (27)   For   useful   and   recent   background   on   another   enabling technique, electrochemistry: (a) Kingston, C.; Palkowitz, M. D.; Takahira, Y.; Vantourout, J. C.; Peters, B. K.; Kawamata, Y.; Baran, P. S. A survival guide for the   “ electro-curious ” .   Acc. Chem. Res.   2020 ,   53 , 72 − 83. (b) Little, R. D. A perspective on organic electrochemistry.   J. Org. Chem.   2020 ,   85 , 13375 − 13390. (28)   Mason,   T.   J.;   Cordemans   de   Meulenaer,   E.   Practical considerations   for   process   optimization.   In   Synthetic   Organic Sonochemistry ; Luche, J.-L., Ed.; Plenum Press: New York, 1998; Chapter 8, pp 301 − 329. (29) Crum, L. A. Comments on the evolving field of sonochemistry by a cavitation physicist.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   1995 ,   2 , S147 − S152. (30) Apfel, R. E. Acoustic cavitation. In   Methods in Experimental Physics ; Edmunds, P., Ed.; Academic Press: New York, 1981; Vol.   19 , Chapter 7, pp 355 − 411. (31)   Gallego-Juárez, J. A.; Gra ff ,   K. F. Introduction to power ultrasonics.   In   Power   Ultrasonics.   Applications   of   High-Intensity Ultrasound ;   Gallego-Juárez,   J.   A.,   Gra ff ,   K.   F.,   Eds.;   Elsevier: Amsterdam, 2015; pp 1 − 6. (32) Pétrier, C.; Jeunet, A.; Luche, J.-L.; Reverdy, G. Unexpected frequency effects on the rate of oxidative processes induced by ultrasound.   J. Am. Chem. Soc.   1992 ,   114 , 3148 − 3152. (33) (a) Leighton, T. G.   The Acoustic Bubble ; Academic Press: London, 1994. (b) Lauterborn, W.; Kurz, T.; Geisler, R.; Schanz, D.; Lindau, O. Acoustic cavitation, bubble dynamics and sonolumines- cence.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2007 ,   14 , 484 − 491. (c) Kauer, M.; Belova- Magri, V.; Cairós, C.; Linka, G.; Mettin, R. High-speed imaging of ultrasound driven cavitation bubbles in blind and through holes.  Ultrason. Sonochem.   2018 ,   48 , 39 − 50. (34) For a good overview on the importance of controlling acoustic power in particular: Wood, R. J.; Lee, J.; Bussemaker, M. J. A parametric review of sonochemistry: control and augmentation of sonochemical activity in aqueous solutions.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2017 ,  38 , 351 − 370. (35) Al-Juboori, R. A.; Yusaf, T.; Bowtell, L.; Aravinthan, V. Energy characterisation   of   ultrasonic   systems   for   industrial   processes.  Ultrasonics   2015 ,   57 , 18 − 30. (36) Mason, T. J.; Lorimer, J. P.; Bates, D. M.; Zhao, Y. Dosimetry in   sonochemistry:   the   use   of   aqueous   terephthalate   ion   as   a fluorescence monitor.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   1994 ,   1 , 591 − 595. (37) Riesz, P. Free radical generation by ultrasound in aqueous solutions   of   volatile   and   non-volatile   solutes.   In   Advances   in Sonochemistry ; Mason, T. J., Ed.; JAI Press Ltd.: London, 1991; Vol.   2 , pp 23 − 64. (38) Fernandez Rivas, D.; Prosperetti, A.; Zijlstra, A. G.; Lohse, D.; Gardeniers, H. J. G. E. Efficient sonochemistry through microbubbles generated with micromachined surfaces.   Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.   2010 ,  49 , 9699 − 9701. (39)   Lee,   J.;   Yasui,   K.;   Ashokkumar,   M.;   Kentish,   S.   E. Quantification of cavitation activity by sonoluminescence to study the sonocrystallization process under different ultrasound parameters.  Cryst. Growth Des.   2018 ,   18 , 5108 − 5115. (40) In a sonochemical context, the terms   convergent   and   divergent  suggested by Luche too, are intended to mean   “ the same ”   and   “ not the same ” , respectively, when silent and irradiated processes are compared each other. In organic synthesis, the usual connotation given to a   convergent approach   involves coupling of fragments with similar complexity and/or functionality, thereby assembling the target molecule in a convergent plan (as opposed to a stepwise linear strategy); for a recent overview, see: Gao, Y.; Ma, D. In Pursuit of Synthetic Efficiency: Convergent Approaches.   Acc. Chem. Res.   2021 ,  54 , 569 − 582. (41) Sinisterra, J. V.; Fuentes, A.; Marinas, J. M. Barium hydroxide as catalyst in organic reactions. 17. Interfacial solid-liquid Wittig-Horner reaction under sonochemical conditions.   J. Org. Chem.   1987 ,   52 , 3875 − 3879. (42) Makino, K.; Mossoba, M. M.; Riesz, P. Chemical effects of ultrasound on aqueous solutions. Evidence for hydroxyl and hydrogen free radicals (.cntdot.OH and. cntdot.H) by spin trapping.   J. Am. Chem. Soc.   1982 ,   104 , 3537 − 3539. (43) Einhorn, C.; Luche, J.-L. Ready preparation of sugar acetals under ultrasonic irradiation.   Carbohydr. Res.   1986 ,   155 , 258 − 261. (44) Low, C. M. R. Ultrasound in synthesis: natural products and supersonic reactions?   Ultrason. Sonochem.   1995 ,   2 , S153 − S163. (45)   Collum,   D.   B.;   McNeil,   A.   J.;   Ramirez,   A.   Lithium diisopropylamide:   solution   kinetics   and   implications   for   organic synthesis.   Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.   2007 ,   46 , 3002 − 3017. (46)   Szostak,   M.;   Spain,   M.;   Procter,   D.   J.   Preparation   of samarium(II) iodide: quantitative evaluation of the effect of water, oxygen, and peroxide content, preparative methods, and the activation of samarium metal.   J. Org. Chem.   2012 ,   77 , 3049 − 3059. (47) De Nicola, A.; Einhorn, J.; Luche, J.-L. An easy preparation of hindered lithium amides.   J. Chem. Res., Synop.   1991 , 278. (48) Ley, S. V.; Low, C. M. R.   Ultrasound in Synthesis ; Springer: Heidelberg, 1989; pp 105 − 118. (49) For an analysis and discussion of some representative examples, see: Luche, J.-L.; Cintas, P. Can sonication modify the regio- and  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13853

# Page 22

stereoselectivities of organic reactions? In   Advances in Sonochemistry ; Mason, T. J., Ed.; JAI Press, Ltd.: London, 1999; Vol.   5 , pp 147 − 174. (50) Jayarajan, R.; Chandrashekar, H. B.; Dalvi, A. K.; Maiti, D. Ultrasound-facilitated direct   meta -C-H functionalization of arenes: a time-economical strategy under ambient temperature with improved yield and selectivity.   Chem. - Eur. J.   2020 ,   26 , 11426 − 11430. (51) Cintas, P.; Palmisano, G.; Cravotto, G. Power ultrasound in metal-assisted synthesis: from classical Barbier-like reactions to click chemistry.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2011 ,   18 , 836 − 841. (52) Cintas, P.; Barge, A.; Tagliapietra, S.; Boffa, L.; Cravotto, G. Alkyne-azide   click   reaction   catalyzed   by   metallic   copper   under ultrasound.   Nat. Protoc.   2010 ,   5 , 607 − 611. (53)   May,   P.   A.;   Moore,   J.   S.   Polymer   mechanochemistry: techniques to generate molecular force via elongational flows.   Chem. Soc. Rev.   2013 ,   42 , 7497 − 7506. (54)   Cravotto,   G.;   Gaudino,   E.   C.;   Cintas,   P.   On   the mechanochemical activation by ultrasound.   Chem. Soc. Rev.   2013 ,  42 , 7521 − 7534. (55) Li, J.; Nagamani, C.; Moore, J. S. Polymer mechanochemistry: from destructive to productive.   Acc. Chem. Res.   2015 ,   48 , 2181 − 2190. (56) Cintas, P.; Cravotto, G.; Barge, A.; Martina, K. Interplay between mechanochemistry and sonochemistry. In   Polymer Mecha- nochemistry-Topics in Current Chemistry , Vol.   369 ; Boulatov, R., Ed.; Springer: Heidelberg, 2015; pp 239 − 284. (57) Mason, T. J.; Cobley, A. J.; Graves, J. E.; Morgan, D. New evidence for the inverse dependence of mechanical and chemical effects on the frequency of ultrasound.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2011 ,   18 , 226 − 230. (58) Nguyen, T. T.; Asakura, Y.; Koda, S.; Yasuda, K. Dependence of cavitation, chemical effect and mechanical effect thresholds on ultrasonic frequency.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2017 ,   39 , 301 − 306. (59)   Boldyrev,   V.   V.   Mechanochemistry   and   sonochemistry.  Ultrason. Sonochem.   1995 ,   2 , S143 − S145. (60) Nguyen, T. Q.; Liang, O. Z.; Kausch, H. H. Kinetics of ultrasonic and transient elongational flow degradation: a comparative study.   Polymer   1997 ,   38 , 3783 − 3793. (61) For a good overview of theoretical interpretations of polymer mechanochemistry   in   sonicated   solutions,   see:   Akbulatov,   S.; Boulatov,   R.   Experimental   polymer   mechanochemistry   and   its interpretational frameworks.   ChemPhysChem   2017 ,   18 , 1422 − 1450. (62) Hickenboth, C. R.; Moore, J. S.; White, S. R.; Sottos, N. R.; Baudry, J.; Wilson, S. R. Biasing reaction pathways with mechanical force.   Nature   2007 ,   446 , 423 − 427. (63)   Ribas-Arino,   J.;   Marx,   D.   Covalent   mechanochemistry: theoretical concepts and computational tools with applications to molecular nanomechanics.   Chem. Rev.   2012 ,   112 , 5412 − 5487. (64) Stauch, T.; Dreuw, A. Advances in quantum mechanochem- istry: electronic structure methods and force analysis.   Chem. Rev.  2016 ,   116 , 14137 − 14180. (65) (a) Garcia-Manyes, S.; Beedle, A. E. M. Steering chemical reactions with force.   Nat. Rev. Chem.   2017 ,   1 , 0083. (b) Li, H.; Walker, G. C. Twist and shout: single-molecule mechanochemistry.  ACS Nano   2017 ,   11 , 28 − 30. (66) Andersen, J. M.; Mack, J. Decoupling the Arrhenius equation via mechanochemistry.   Chem. Sci.   2017 ,   8 , 5447 − 5453. (67) (a) Gogate, P. R.; Prajapat, A. L. Depolymerization using sonochemical reactors: a critical review.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2015 ,   27 , 480 − 494. (b) McKenzie, T. G.; Karimi, F.; Ashokkumar, M.; Qiao, G. G. Ultrasound and sonochemistry for radical polymerization: sound synthesis.   Chem. - Eur. J.   2019 ,   25 , 5372 − 5388. (68) (a) Berkowski, K. L.; Potisek, S. L.; Hickenboth, C. R.; Moore, J. S. Ultrasound-induced site-specific cleavage of azo-functionalized poly(ethylene glycol).   Macromolecules   2005 ,   38 , 8975 − 8978. (b) For a brief retrospective, see: De Bo, G. Polymer mechanochemistry and the emergence of the mechanophore concept.   Macromolecules   2020 ,  53 , 7615 − 7617. (69) See, for instance: Nakamura, E.; Imanishi, Y.; Machii, D. Sonochemical initiation of radical chain reactions. Hydrostannation and hydroxystannation of C-C multiple bonds.   J. Org. Chem.   1994 ,   59 , 8178 − 8186. (70) Bowser, B. H.; Craig, S. L. Empowering mechanochemistry with multi-mechanophore polymer architectures.   Polym. Chem.   2018 ,  9 , 3583 − 3593. (71) Chen, Z.; Mercer, J. A. M.; Zhu, X.; Romaniuk, J. A. H.; Pfattner, R.; Cegelski, L.; Martinez, T. J.; Burns, N. Z.; Xia, Y. Mechanochemical unzipping of insulating polyladderene to semi- conducting polyacetylene.   Science   2017 ,   357 , 475 − 479. (72) For recent studies of ladderane unzipping and polyladderene- polyacetylene copolymers, see: (a) Chen, Z.; Zhu, X.; Yang, J.; Mercer, J. A. M.; Burns, N. Z.; Martinez, T. J.; Xia, Y. The cascade unzipping of ladderane reveals dynamic effects in mechanochemistry.  Nat. Chem.   2020 ,   12 , 302 − 309. (b) Boswell, B. R.; Mansson, C. M. F.; Cox, J. M.; Jin, Z.; Romaniuk, J. A. H.; Lindquist, K. P.; Cegelski, L.; Xia, Y.; López, S. A.; Burns, N. Z. Mechanochemical synthesis of an elusive fluorinated polyacetylene.   Nat. Chem.   2021 ,   13 , 41 − 46. (73) Huang, W.; Wu, X.; Gao, X.; Yu, Y.; Lei, H.; Zhu, Z.; Shi, Y.; Chen, Y.; Qin, M.; Wang, W.; Cao, Y. Maleimide-thiol adducts stabilized through stretching.   Nat. Chem.   2019 ,   11 , 310 − 319. (74) Shi, Z.; Song, Q.; Göstl, R.; Herrmann, A. Mechanochemical activation of disulfide-based multifunctional polymers for theranostic drug release.   Chem. Sci.   2021 ,   12 , 1668 − 1674. (75) (a) Huo, S.; Zhao, P.; Shi, Z.; Zou, M.; Yang, X.; Warszawik, E.; Loznik, M.; Göstl, R.; Herrmann, A. Mechanochemical bond scission for the activation of drugs.   Nat. Chem.   2021 ,   13 , 131 − 139. (b) For a commentary, see: Boulatov, R. The liberating force of ultrasound.   Nat. Chem.   2021 ,   13 , 112 − 113. (76) Lattwein, K. R.; Shekhar, H.; Kouijzer, J. J. P.; Van Wamel, W. J. B.; Holland, C. K.; Kooiman, K. Sonobactericide: an emerging treatment strategy for bacterial infections.   Ultrasound Med. Biol.   2020 ,  46 , 193 − 215. (77) Chettab, K.; Mestas, J.-L.; Lafond, M.; Saadna, D. E.; Lafon, C.; Dumontet,   C.   Doxorubicin   delivery   into   tumor   cells   by   stable cavitation without contrast agents.   Mol. Pharmaceutics   2017 ,   14 , 441 −  447. (78) (a) Cádiz Bedini, A. P.; Muthmann, S.; Allgaier, J.; Bittkau, K.; Finger, F.; Carius, R. Liquid hydridosilane precursor prepared from cyclopentasilane via sonication at low temperature without the action of   light.   Ultrason.   Sonochem.   2017 ,   34 ,   289 − 293.   (b)   For   a commentary, see: Hidding, B. Sonochemistry of silicon hydrides.  Science   2018 ,   360 , 489 − 490. (79) For recent perspectives on sonochemical methods towards sustainable chemistry, see: (a) Cravotto, G.; Borretto, E.; Oliverio, M.; Procopio, A.; Penoni, A. Organic reactions in water or biphasic aqueous   systems   under   sonochemical   conditions.   A   review   on catalytic effects.   Catal. Commun.   2015 ,   63 , 2 − 9. (b) Draye, M.; Kardos, N. Advances in green organic sonochemistry.   Top. Curr. Chem.   2016 ,   374 , 74. (c) Wu, Z.; Tagliapietra, S.; Giraudo, A.; Martina, K.; Cravotto, G. Harnessing cavitational effects for green process intensification.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2019 ,   52 , 530 − 546. (80) Jiménez-González, C.; Constable, D. J. C.; Ponder, C. S. Evaluating the greenness of chemical processes and products in the pharmaceutical industry-a green metrics primer.   Chem. Soc. Rev.   2012 ,  41 , 1485 − 1498. (81) (a) Fegade, S. L.; Trembly, J. P. Misinterpretation of Green chemistry.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2017 ,   37 , 686 − 687. (b) Cintas, P. Ultrasound   and   green   chemistry-further   comments.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2016 ,   28 , 257 − 258. (82) There is some misuse and confusion about the terms   “ in-water ”  and   “ on-water ” , especially without a clear-cut mechanistic analysis. It is assumed that the   fi rst happens in the bulk aqueous medium and the latter denotes a transition structure located at the organic side of the organic − water interface: Li, C. J.; Chen, L. Organic chemistry in water.   Chem. Soc. Rev.   2006 ,   35 , 68 − 82. (83) Ando, T.; Kimura, T. Ultrasonic organic synthesis involving non-metal solids. In   Advances in Sonochemistry ; Mason, T. J., Ed.; JAI Press, Inc.: London, 1991; Vol.   2 , pp 211 − 251 and references cited therein.  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13854

# Page 23

(84) (a) Tuulmets, A.; Hagu, H.; Salmar, S.; Cravotto, G.; Järv, J. Ultrasonic evidence of hydrophobic interactions. Effect of ultrasound on   benzoin   condensation   and   some   other   reactions   in   aqueous ethanol.   J. Phys. Chem. B   2007 ,   111 , 3133 − 3138. (b) Salmar, S.; Cravotto, G.; Tuulmets, A.; Hagu, H. Effect of ultrasound on the base-catalyzed hydrolysis of 4-nitrophenyl acetate in aqueous ethanol.  J. Phys. Chem. B   2006 ,   110 , 5817 − 5821. (85) (a) Gulajski, L.; Sledz, P.; Lupa, A.; Grela, K. Olefin metathesis in water using acoustic emulsification.   Green Chem.   2008 ,   10 , 271 −  274. (b) Gulajski, L.; Tracz, A.; Urbaniak, K.; Czarnocki, S. J.; Bieniek, M.; Olszewski, T. K. Ammonium-tagged ruthenium-based catalysts for olefin metathesis in aqueous media under ultrasound and microwave irradiation.   Beilstein J. Org. Chem.   2019 ,   15 , 160 − 166. (86) Jaiswal, P. K.; Sharma, V.; Prikhodko, J.; Mashevskaya, I. V.; Chaudhary,   S.   On   water   ultrasound-assisted   one-pot   efficient synthesis of functionalized 2-oxo-benzo[1,4]oxazines: first application to   the   synthesis   of   anticancer   indole   alkaloid   Cephalandole   A.  Tetrahedron Lett.   2017 ,   58 , 2077 − 2083. (87) Rogozinska, M.; Adamkiewicz, A.; Mlynarski, J. Efficient   “ on water ”   organocatalytic protocol for the synthesis of optically pure warfarin anticoagulant.   Green Chem.   2011 ,   13 , 1155 − 1157. (88) Lee, J.; Kentish, S.; Matula, T. J.; Ashokkumar, M. Effect of surfactants on inertial cavitation activity in pulsed acoustic field.   J. Phys. Chem. B   2005 ,   109 , 16860 − 16865. (89) More, P. A.; Shankarling, G. S. Energy efficient Pfitzinger reaction: a novel strategy using a surfactant catalyst.   New J. Chem.  2017 ,   41 , 12380 − 12383. (90) Kamble, S.; Kumbhar, A.; Rashinkar, G.; Barge, M.; Salunkhe, R. Ultrasound promoted efficient and green synthesis of   β -amino carbonyl   compounds   in   aqueous   hydrotropic   medium.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2012 ,   19 , 812 − 815. (91) Saleh, T. S.; Al-Bogami, A. S.; Mekky, A. E. M.; Alkhathlan, H. Z. Sonochemical synthesis of novel pyrano[3,4- e ][1,3]oxazines: a green protocol.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2017 ,   36 , 474 − 480. (92) Fillion, H.; Luche, J.-L. Cycloadditions. In   Synthetic Organic Sonochemistry ; Luche, J.-L., Ed.; Plenum Press: New York, 1998; pp 91 − 106 and references cited therein. (93) (a) Bauld, N. L. Cation radical cycloadditions and related sigmatropic reactions.   Tetrahedron   1989 ,   45 , 5307 − 5363. (b) Bauld, N. L. Ab initio theoretical reaction path study of the cation radical Diels-Alder reaction.   J.   Am.   Chem.   Soc.   1992 ,   114 ,   5800 − 5804. (c) Bauld, N. L.; Gao, D. The electron transfer chemistry of carbon- carbon multiple bonds. In   Electron Transfer in Chemistry ; Balzani, V., Ed.; Wiley-VCH: Weinheim, 2001; Vol.   2 , Part 1, pp 133 − 205. (d) For a cycloaddition involving a radical anion species, see: Roh, Y.; Jang, H.-Y.; Lynch, V.; Bauld, N. L.; Krische, M. J. Anion radical chain cycloaddition of tethered enones: intramolecular cyclobutanation and Diels-Alder cycloaddition.   Org. Lett.   2002 ,   4 , 611 − 613. (94) (a) Cabello, N.; Cintas, P.; Luche, J.-L. Sonochemical effects in the   addition   of   furan   to   masked   ortho -benzoquinones.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2003 ,   10 , 25 − 31. (b) Avalos, M.; Babiano, R.; Cabello, N.; Cintas, P.; Hursthouse, M. B.; Jiménez, J. L.; Light, M. E.; Palacios, J. C. Thermal and sonochemical studies on the Diels-Alder cyclo- additions of masked   o -benzoquinones with furans: new insights into the reaction mechanism.   J. Org. Chem.   2003 ,   68 , 7193 − 7203. (95) For a recent critical review, see: Schmidt, F.; Cokoja, M. Supramolecular concepts for the biphasic epoxidation of olefins using aqueous hydrogen peroxide.   Green Chem.   2021 ,   23 , 708 − 722. (96) Chatel, G.; Goux-Henry, C.; Mirabaud, A.; Rossi, T.; Kardos, N.; Andrioletti, B.; Draye, M. H 2   O 2   /NaHCO 3   -Mediated enantiose- lective epoxidation of olefins in NTf 2   -based ionic liquids and under ultrasound.   J. Catal.   2012 ,   291 , 127 − 132. (97) Cousin, T.; Chatel, G.; Kardos, N.; Andrioletti, B.; Draye, M. High frequency ultrasound as a tool for elucidating mechanistic elements   of   cis-cyclooctene   epoxidation   with   aqueous   hydrogen peroxide.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2019 ,   53 , 120 − 125. (98) Calcio Gaudino, E.; Cravotto, G.; Manzoli, M.; Tabasso, S. Sono- and mechanochemical technologies in the catalytic conversion of biomass.   Chem. Soc. Rev.   2021 ,   50 , 1785 − 1812. (99) Amaniampong, P. N.; Trinh, Q. T.; De Oliveira Vigier, K.; Dao, D. Q.; Tran, N. H.; Wang, Y.; Sherburne, M. P.; Jéro ̂   me, F. Synergistic effect of high-frequency ultrasound with cupric oxide catalyst resulting in a selectivity switch in glucose oxidation under argon.   J. Am. Chem. Soc.   2019 ,   141 , 14772 − 14779. (100) Newnham, R. E.   Properties of Materials. Anisotropy, Symmetry, Structure ; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2005; pp 87 − 102. (101) Pardo, L. Piezoelectric ceramic materials for power ultrasonic transducers.   In   Power   Ultrasonics.   Applications   of   High-Intensity Ultrasound ;   Gallego-Juárez,   J.   A.,   Gra ff ,   K.   F.,   Eds.;   Elsevier: Amsterdam, 2015; pp 101 − 125. (102) Li, F.; Cabral, M. J.; Xu, B.; Cheng, Z.; Dickey, E. C.; LeBeau, J. M.; Wang, J.; Luo, J.; Taylor, S.; Hackenberger, W.; Bellaiche, L.; Xu, Z.; Chen, L.-Q.; Shrout, T. R.; Zhang, S. Giant piezoelectricity of Sm-doped Pb(Mg   1/3 Nb 2/3   )O   3 -PbTiO   3   single crystals.   Science   2019 ,  364 , 264 − 268. (103) Gra ff , K. F. Power ultrasonic transducers: principles and design. In   Power Ultrasonics. Applications of High-Intensity Ultrasound ; Gallego-Juárez, J. A., Gra ff , K. F., Eds.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, 2015; pp 127 − 158. (104) Hong, K.-S.; Xu, H.; Konishi, H.; Li, X. Direct water splitting through vibrating piezoelectric microfibers in water.   J. Phys. Chem. Lett.   2010 ,   1 , 997 − 1002. (105) Morosini, V.; Chave, T.; Virot, M.; Moisy, P.; Nikitenko, S. I. Sonochemical water splitting in the presence of powdered metal oxides.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2016 ,   29 , 512 − 516. (106) Vedadi, M. H.; Haas, S. Mechano-chemical pathways to H   2 O and CO 2   spliting.   Appl. Phys. Lett.   2011 ,   99 , 154105. (107) (a) Wang, Z.; Pan, X.; Yan, J.; Dadashi-Silab, S.; Xie, G.; Zhang, J.; Wang, Z.; Xia, H.; Matyjaszewski, K. Temporal control in mechanically controlled atom transfer radical polymerization using low ppm of Cu catalyst.   ACS Macro Lett.   2017 ,   6 , 546 − 549. (b) Pan, X.; Fantin, M.; Yuan, F.; Matyjaszewski, K. Externally controlled atom transfer radical polymerization.   Chem. Soc. Rev.   2018 ,   47 , 5457 − 5490. (108) Mohapatra, H.; Kleiman, M.; Esser-Kahn, A. P. Mechanically controlled radical polymerization initiated by ultrasound.   Nat. Chem.  2017 ,   9 , 135 − 139. (109) Mohapatra, H.; Ayarza, J.; Sanders, E. C.; Scheuermann, A. M.; Griffin, P. J.; Esser-Kahn, A. P. Ultrasound promoted step-growth polymerization and polymer crosslinking via copper catalyzed azide- alkyne   “ click ”   reaction.   Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.   2018 ,   57 , 11208 −  11212. (110) Kubota, K.; Pang, Y.; Miura, A.; Ito, H. Redox reactions of small organic molecules using ball milling and piezoelectric materials.  Science   2019 ,   366 , 1500 − 1504. (111) Pang, Y.; Lee, J. W.; Kubota, K.; Ito, H. Solid-state radical C- H trifluoromethylation reactions using ball milling and piezoelectric materials.   Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.   2020 ,   59 , 22570 − 22576. (112) Huang, G.; Chen, S.; Dai, C.; Sun, L.; Sun, W.; Tang, Y.; Xiong, F.; He, R.; Ma, H. Effects of ultrasound on microbial growth and enzyme activity.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2017 ,   37 , 144 − 149. (113)   Yoon,   J.;   Kim,   J.;   Tieves,   F.;   Zhang,   W.;   Alcalde,   M.; Hollmann,   F.;   Park,   C.   B.   Piezobiocatalysis:   ultrasound-driven enzymatic oxyfunctionalization of C-H bonds.   ACS Catal.   2020 ,   10 , 5236 − 5242. (114)   Takenaka,   T.   Bismuth-based   piezoelectric   ceramics.   In  Piezoelectric   and   Acoustic   Materials   for   Transducer   Applications ; Safari, A., Akdogan, E. K., Eds.; Springer: Boston, 2008; pp 103 − 130. (115) For a previous study merging the action of piezoelectric BiOCl and ultrasound, see: Shao, D.; Zhang, L.; Sun, S.; Wang, W. Oxygen reduction reaction for generating H   2   O 2   through a piezo- catalytic process over bismuth oxychloride.   ChemSusChem   2018 ,   11 , 527 − 531. (116) For another piezoelectric titanate activated by ultrasound to produce hydroxyl radicals, see: Ling, J.; Wang, K.; Wang, Z.; Huang, H.; Zhang, G. Enhanced piezoelectric-induced catalysis of SrTiO 3 nanocrystal   with   well-defined   facets   under   ultrasonic   vibration.  Ultrason. Sonochem.   2020 ,   61 , 104819.  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13855

# Page 24

(117) For leading approaches toward chemical automation, see: (a) Li, J.; Ballmer, S. G.; Gillis, E. P.; Fujii, S.; Schmidt, M. J.; Palazzolo, A. M. E.; Lehmann, J. W.; Morehouse, G. F.; Burke, M. D. Synthesis of many different types of organic small molecules using an automated process.   Science   2015 ,   347 , 1221 − 1226. (b) Trobe, M.; Burke,   M.   D.   The   molecular   industrial   revolution:   automated synthesis   of   small   molecules.   Angew.   Chem.,   Int.   Ed.   2018 ,   57 , 4192 − 4214. (c) Bédard, A.-C.; Adamo, A.; Aroh, K. C.; Russell, M. G.; Bedermann, A. A.; Torosian, J.; Yue, B.; Jensen, K. F.; Jamison, T. F.   Reconfigurable   system   for   automated   optimization   of   diverse chemical reactions.   Science   2018 ,   361 , 1220 − 1225. (118) For recent examples of optimization tools, see: (a) Klucznik, T.; Mikulak-Klucznik, B.; McCormack, M. P.; Lima, H.; Szymku, S.; Bhowmick, M.; Molga, K.; Zhou, Y.; Rickershauser, L.; Gajewska, E. P.; Toutchkine, A.; Dittwald, P.; Startek, M. P.; Kirkovits, G. J.; Roszak, R.; Adamski, A.; Sieredzinska, B.; Mrksich, M.; Trice, S. L. J.; Grzybowski, B. A. Efficient synthesis of diverse medicinally relevant targets planned by computer and executed in the laboratory.   Chem.  2018 ,   4 , 1 − 11. (b) Shi, Y.; Prieto, P. L.; Zepel, T.; Grunert, S.; Hein, J. E. Automated experimentation powers data science in chemistry.  Acc. Chem. Res.   2021 ,   54 , 546 − 555. (c) Angelone, D.; Hammer, A. J. S.; Rohrbach, S.; Krambeck, S.; Granda, J. M.; Wolf, J.; Zalesskiy, S.; Chisholm,   G.;   Cronin,   L.   Convergence   of   multiple   synthetic paradigms in a universally programmable chemical synthesis machine.  Nat. Chem.   2021 ,   13 , 63 − 69. (d) Shields, B. J.; Stevens, J.; Li, J.; Parasram, M.; Damani, F.; Martinez Alvarado, J. I.; Janey, J. M.; Adams, R. P.; Doyle, A. G. Bayesian reaction optimization as a tool for chemical synthesis.   Nature   2021 ,   590 , 89 − 96. (119) (a) Gogate, P. R.; Sutkar, V. S.; Pandit, A. B. Sonochemical reactors: important design and scale up considerations with a special emphasis on heterogeneous systems.   Chem. Eng. J.   2011 ,   166 , 1066 −  1082. (b) Patist, A.; Bates, D. Industrial applications of high power ultrasonics. In   Ultrasound Technologies for Food and Bioprocessing ; Feng, H., Barbosa-Canovas, G., Weiss, J., Eds.; Springer: New York, 2011; pp 599 − 616. (120) (a) Cintas, P.; Mantegna, S.; Gaudino, E. C.; Cravotto, G. A new   pilot   flow   reactor   for   high-intensity   ultrasound   irradiation. Application to the synthesis of biodiesel.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2010 ,  17 , 985 − 989. (b) Crudo, D.; Bosco, V.; Cavaglia ̀   , G.; Grillo, G.; Mantegna,   S.;   Cravotto,   G.   Process   intensification   in   biodiesel production   with   a   rotor-stator   type   generator   of   hydrodynamic cavitation.   Ultrason. Sonochem.   2016 ,   33 , 220 − 225. (121) (a) Fernandez Rivas, D.; Cintas, P.; Gardeniers, H. J. G. E. Merging microfluidics and sonochemistry: towards greener and more efficient micro-sono-reactors.   Chem. Commun.   2012 ,   48 , 10935 −  10947. (b) Fernandez Rivas, D.; Kuhn, S. Synergy of microfluidics and ultrasound. Process intensification, challenges and opportunities.  Top. Curr. Chem.   2016 ,   374 , 70. (122) Li, Y.; Liu, X.; Huang, Q.; Ohta, A. T.; Arai, T. Bubbles in microfluidics: an all-purpose tool for micromanipulation.   Lab Chip  2021 ,   21 , 1016 − 1035. (123) For a good overview of emerging strategies applied to the preparation of pharmaceuticals, see: Campos, K. R.; Coleman, P. J.; Alvarez, J. C.; Dreher, S. D.; Garbaccio, R. M.; Terrett, N. K.; Tillyer, R. D.; Truppo, M. D.; Parmee, E. R. The importance of synthetic chemistry   in   the   pharmaceutical   industry.   Science   2019 ,   363 , No. eaat0805. (124) Gutmann, B.; Cantillo, D.; Kappe, C. O. Continuous flow technology-a tool for the safe manufacturing of active pharmaceutical ingredients.   Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.   2015 ,   54 , 6688 − 6728. (125) Cantillo, D.; Damm, M.; Dallinger, D.; Bauser, M.; Berger, M.; Kappe, C. O. Sequential nitration/hydrogenation protocol for the synthesis of triaminophloroglucinol: safe generation and use of an explosive intermediate under continuous-flow conditions.   Org. Process Res. Dev.   2014 ,   18 , 1360 − 1366. (126) (a) Jensen, K. F.; Reizman, B. J.; Newman, S. G. Tools for chemical synthesis in microsystems.   Lab Chip   2014 ,   14 , 3206 − 3212. (b)   Dong,   Z.;   Fernandez   Rivas,   D.;   Kuhn,   S.   Acoustophoretic focusing effects on particle synthesis and clogging in microreactors.  Lab Chip   2019 ,   19 , 316 − 327. (127) Aljbour, S.; Yamada, H.; Tagawa, T. Ultrasound-assisted phase-transfer catalysis in a capillary microreactor.   Chem. Eng. Process.  2009 ,   48 , 1167 − 1172. (128)   Banaszak-Léonard,   E.;   Mangin,   F.;   Len,   C.   Barton decarboxylation under ultrasonic continuous flow.   New J. Chem.  2016 ,   40 , 7414 − 7420. (129) (a) Ingham, R. J.; Battilochio, C.; Fitzpatrick, D. E.; Sliwinski, E.; Hawkins, J. M.; Ley, S. V. A systems approach towards intelligent and   self-controlling   platform   for   integrated   continuous   reaction sequences.   Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.   2015 ,   54 , 144 − 148. (b) Fitzpatrick, D. E.; Battilocchio, C.; Ley, S. V. Enabling technologies for the future of chemical synthesis.   ACS Cent. Sci.   2016 ,   2 , 131 − 138. (130) Kuhn, S.; Noël, T.; Gu, L.; Heider, P. L.; Jensen, K. F. A Teflon microreactor with integrated piezoelectric actuator to handle solid forming reactions.   Lab Chip   2011 ,   11 , 2488 − 2492. (131) Kulkarni, K.; Friend, J.; Yeo, L.; Perlmutter, P. Surface acoustic   waves   as   an   emerging   source   for   drop   scale   synthetic chemistry.   Lab Chip   2009 ,   9 , 754 − 755. (132) In solids, sound may propagate at speeds much greater than in air or bulk liquids: (a) Kuznetsova, I. E.; Zaitsev, B. D.; Joshi, S. G.; Borodina, I. A. Investigation of acoustic waves in thin plates of lithium niobate and lithium tantalate.   IEEE Trans. Ultrasonics Ferroelectrics   &  Frequency   2001 ,   48 , 322 − 328. (b) Auld, B. A.   Acoustic Fields and Waves in Solids ; John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: New York, 1973; Vol.   I . (133) (a) Lin, S.-C. S.; Mao, X.; Huang, T. J. Surface acoustic wave (SAW) acoustophoresis: now and beyond.   Lab Chip   2012 ,   12 , 2766 −  2770. (b) Thompson, M.; Stone, D. C.   Surface-Launched Acoustic Wave Sensors ; John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: New York, 1997. (134) (a) Kelling, S.; Cerasari, S.; Rotermund, H. H.; Ertl, G.; King, D. A. A photoemission electron microscopy (PEEM) study of the effect of surface acoustic waves on catalytic CO oxidation over Pt{110}.   Chem. Phys. Lett.   1998 ,   293 , 325 − 330. (b) Mitrelias, T.; Kelling, S.; Kvon, R. I.; Ostanin, V. P.; King, D. A. Effect of acoustic excitation on the rate of CO oxidation over Pt{110}.   Surf. Sci.   1998 ,  417 , 97 − 106. (135)   (a)   Wu,   C.;   Zaitsev,   V.   Y.;   Zhigilei,   L.   V.   Acoustic enhancement   of   surface   diffusion.   J.   Phys.   Chem.   C   2013 ,   117 , 9252 − 9258. (b) Von Boehn, B.; Foerster, M.; von Boehn, M.; Prat, J.; Macia ̀   , F.; Casals, B.; Khaliq, M. W.; Hernández-Mínguez, A.; Aballe, L.; Imbihl, R. On the promotion of catalytic reactions by surface acoustic waves.   Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.   2020 ,   59 , 20224 − 20229. (136) García Lorca, F.   Romancero Gitano-Poema del Cante Jondo ; Anaya: Madrid, 2006.  The Journal of Organic Chemistry   pubs.acs.org/joc   Perspective https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805  J. Org. Chem.   2021, 86, 13833 − 13856  13856

## Figure Captions (auto-extracted)

- **p.2 (Fig 1.)** Figure 1. Volatile reagents and solvents will be trapped in the sufficiently volatile to enter an expanding bubble and microbubbles, then undergoing homolytic cleavage and/or fragmented into carbonaceous radicals as well. Both radical— conversion into excited states. This represents a primary radical and radical-molecule reactions should be equally
- **p.3 (Fig 2.)** Figure 2. Some basic precepts and tips for proper use of ultrasonic devices. The image (from left to right) shows the usual setups (bath, probe, and cup horn) to conduct sonochemical reactions. 13835 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805
- **p.4 (Fig 2.)** Figure 2.””° Such setups usually work at a given frequency with Although global effects vary with the acoustic frequency,’ it wave amplitudes controlled by external voltage. Multifrequency makes no sense to worry about using specific frequencies. reactors, even reaching the MHz zone, are more expensive and Moreover, in some common devices, such as baths, the
- **p.12 (Fig 3.)** Figure 3. Cycloadduct yield as function of temperature at three renders the process uncontrolled. To check the influence of acoustic powers for the reaction of methyl vanillate and furan. sonochemical parameters, high-frequency irradiation was Reproduced with permission from ref 94a. Copyright 2003 Elsevier applied at low acoustic power to ensure a steady 60 °C
- **p.14** Figure S. (Top) Micrometer-sized BaTiO; or ZnO experience acoustic vibrations that cause water splitting via piezoelectric effect. (Bottom) (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of BaTiO; dendrites grown on a glass substrate; (¢) SEM and (d) TEM images of ZnO fibers grown on a Si(100) wafer. (e) Morphologies of a single ZnO fiber (upper image) and BaTiO; dendrite (lower image). Reproduced from ref 104. Copyright 2010 American
- **p.15 (Fig 6.)** Figure 6. Sonication-induced catalytic C—H oxyfunctionalization using piezoelectric BiOCl microsheets plus an unspecific peroxyge- “Photo (bottom) reproduced with permission from ref 109. nase. Reproduced from ref 113. Copyright 2020 American Chemical
- **p.16 (Fig 9.)** Figure 9. Sonochemical Barton decarboxylation of carboxylic acids Chemistry from this century on should be dominated by the under continuous flow. The protocol was optimized for hexanoic acid juxtaposition of automation and machine-learning algorithms, and N-phenylmaleimide using dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC).
- **p.16 (Fig 7.)** Figure 7. Continuous flow nitration of phloroglucinol assisted by : : : : : yy rapid formation and consumption of intermediates and sonication. Reproduced from ref 125. Copyright 2014 American
- **p.16 (Fig 8.)** Figure 8. Capillary sonoreactor for phase-transfer catalysis. Reproduced with permission from ref 127. Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. 13848 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c00805 J. Org. Chem. 2021, 86, 13833-13856
- **p.17 (Fig 10.)** Figure 10. Telescoped eight-step continuous flow synthesis affording a polycyclic intermediate of biological importance. Reproduced from ref 129b. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. microchannel device in an ultrasonic bath as depicted in Figure production (H®* and OH®) and removing oxygen from the
- **p.18 (Fig 11.)** Figure 11. Multilayered Teflon-made microsonoreactor that enables rapid dissolution of solid particles by ultrasonic irradiation as shown by microscopic images. Reproduced with permission from ref 130. Copyright 2011 the Royal Society of Chemistry. ~~ J by collapse contribute to break and dissolve solid particles
- **p.18 (Fig 12.)** Figure 12. Piezoelectric device employed for some drop reactions pTOIMISING tool in chemical SENSE and 1anop article (~40 uL) shown below, irradiated by surface acoustic waves (SAWS) manipulation, from 1 mechanistic standpoint such soft generated by an external oscillating electric field on the piezoelectric waves can be an alternative to other droplet generation and
