pyrrolidone (PVP), and (2) anhydrous AIClz in conventional hexadecane solvent
respectively, as case studies. The PVP polymer is used to adjudge sonocrystallization
phenomena without bulk solution heating at ambient laboratory conditions. This
judgment is to isolate whether it is an athermal shock wave generated shear/pressure
linked or temperature linked process. In contrast, metallic Al is used to understand the
crystal growth aspect employing “ultrasonic-assisted process intensification activity”
based on conventional solution-phase chemical Al precursor reduction process to
deliver Al nanoparticles. As stated, sonoprocess generated Al nanoparticles of uniform
dimension and surface oxide-free are incorporated into the sonocrystallized PVP
matrix. The motivation of this chapter is employing sono-process for achieving the
fabrication PVP (P), graphitic carbon (GC), and Al (M) incorporated air-stable
composite. Further is to examine the loss of metallic content after year-long storage,
which is essential for fuel application.

In this context, generic protocols to fabricate oxide-free Al nanocrystals involve
either; (1) direct solution-phase reduction of Al precursor reduction leading to Al
crystal growth or via a (2) alane-precursor based thermal decomposition schemes [306]
[308]. In these schemes for safe laboratory handling, surface passivation of the Al
nanostructured product is achieved either by (a) controlled air exposure (help in
developing thin amorphous Al20s outer shell) or (2) an appropriate polymer surface
coating respectively. Most importantly, these protocols run over several long hours to
complete. It is important to note that, besides sono-chemical, attempts to superimpose
with electric and microwave field stimulation on many conventional approaches for
reaction process intensification is also reported [309], [310]. Significantly, the
introduction of sonochemical stimulation to the organic alane-precursor based thermal
decomposition (protocol-2) reaction scales down, remarkably, to just several minutes
[311]. Although the use of inorganic Al precursor also attempted in sono-
electrochemical, electrochemical template deposition and polymer stabilization, the

8
